CHAPTER IV

Raskolnikov had been a vigorous and active champion of Sonia against
Luzhin, although he had such a load of horror and anguish in his own
heart. But having gone through so much in the morning, he found a sort
of relief in a change of sensations, apart from the strong personal
feeling which impelled him to defend Sonia. He was agitated too,
especially at some moments, by the thought of his approaching interview
with Sonia: he _had_ to tell her who had killed Lizaveta. He knew the
terrible suffering it would be to him and, as it were, brushed away the
thought of it. So when he cried as he left Katerina Ivanovnas, Well,
Sofya Semyonovna, we shall see what youll say now! he was still
superficially excited, still vigorous and defiant from his triumph over
Luzhin. But, strange to say, by the time he reached Sonias lodging, he
felt a sudden impotence and fear. He stood still in hesitation at the
door, asking himself the strange question: Must he tell her who killed
Lizaveta? It was a strange question because he felt at the very time
not only that he could not help telling her, but also that he could
not put off the telling. He did not yet know why it must be so, he
only _felt_ it, and the agonising sense of his impotence before
the inevitable almost crushed him. To cut short his hesitation and
suffering, he quickly opened the door and looked at Sonia from the
doorway. She was sitting with her elbows on the table and her face in
her hands, but seeing Raskolnikov she got up at once and came to meet
him as though she were expecting him.

What would have become of me but for you? she said quickly, meeting
him in the middle of the room.

Evidently she was in haste to say this to him. It was what she had been
waiting for.

Raskolnikov went to the table and sat down on the chair from which she
had only just risen. She stood facing him, two steps away, just as she
had done the day before.

Well, Sonia? he said, and felt that his voice was trembling, it was
all due to your social position and the habits associated with it. Did
you understand that just now?

Her face showed her distress.

Only dont talk to me as you did yesterday, she interrupted him.
Please dont begin it. There is misery enough without that.

She made haste to smile, afraid that he might not like the reproach.

I was silly to come away from there. What is happening there now? I
wanted to go back directly, but I kept thinking that... you would come.

He told her that Amalia Ivanovna was turning them out of their lodging
and that Katerina Ivanovna had run off somewhere to seek justice.

My God! cried Sonia, lets go at once....

And she snatched up her cape.

Its everlastingly the same thing! said Raskolnikov, irritably.
Youve no thought except for them! Stay a little with me.

But... Katerina Ivanovna?

You wont lose Katerina Ivanovna, you may be sure, shell come to you
herself since she has run out, he added peevishly. If she doesnt find
you here, youll be blamed for it....

Sonia sat down in painful suspense. Raskolnikov was silent, gazing at
the floor and deliberating.

This time Luzhin did not want to prosecute you, he began, not looking
at Sonia, but if he had wanted to, if it had suited his plans, he would
have sent you to prison if it had not been for Lebeziatnikov and me.
Ah?

Yes, she assented in a faint voice. Yes, she repeated, preoccupied
and distressed.

But I might easily not have been there. And it was quite an accident
Lebeziatnikovs turning up.

Sonia was silent.

And if youd gone to prison, what then? Do you remember what I said
yesterday?

Again she did not answer. He waited.

I thought you would cry out again dont speak of it, leave off.
 Raskolnikov gave a laugh, but rather a forced one. What, silence
again? he asked a minute later. We must talk about something, you
know. It would be interesting for me to know how you would decide a
certain problem as Lebeziatnikov would say. (He was beginning to lose
the thread.) No, really, I am serious. Imagine, Sonia, that you had
known all Luzhins intentions beforehand. Known, that is, for a fact,
that they would be the ruin of Katerina Ivanovna and the children and
yourself thrown in--since you dont count yourself for anything--Polenka
too... for shell go the same way. Well, if suddenly it all depended on
your decision whether he or they should go on living, that is whether
Luzhin should go on living and doing wicked things, or Katerina Ivanovna
should die? How would you decide which of them was to die? I ask you?

Sonia looked uneasily at him. There was something peculiar in this
hesitating question, which seemed approaching something in a roundabout
way.

I felt that you were going to ask some question like that, she said,
looking inquisitively at him.

I dare say you did. But how is it to be answered?

Why do you ask about what could not happen? said Sonia reluctantly.

Then it would be better for Luzhin to go on living and doing wicked
things? You havent dared to decide even that!

But I cant know the Divine Providence.... And why do you ask what
cant be answered? Whats the use of such foolish questions? How could
it happen that it should depend on my decision--who has made me a judge
to decide who is to live and who is not to live?

Oh, if the Divine Providence is to be mixed up in it, there is no doing
anything, Raskolnikov grumbled morosely.

Youd better say straight out what you want! Sonia cried in distress.
You are leading up to something again.... Can you have come simply to
torture me?

She could not control herself and began crying bitterly. He looked at
her in gloomy misery. Five minutes passed.

Of course youre right, Sonia, he said softly at last. He was suddenly
changed. His tone of assumed arrogance and helpless defiance was gone.
Even his voice was suddenly weak. I told you yesterday that I was not
coming to ask forgiveness and almost the first thing Ive said is to ask
forgiveness.... I said that about Luzhin and Providence for my own sake.
I was asking forgiveness, Sonia....

He tried to smile, but there was something helpless and incomplete in
his pale smile. He bowed his head and hid his face in his hands.

And suddenly a strange, surprising sensation of a sort of bitter hatred
for Sonia passed through his heart. As it were wondering and frightened
of this sensation, he raised his head and looked intently at her; but he
met her uneasy and painfully anxious eyes fixed on him; there was
love in them; his hatred vanished like a phantom. It was not the real
feeling; he had taken the one feeling for the other. It only meant that
_that_ minute had come.

He hid his face in his hands again and bowed his head. Suddenly he
turned pale, got up from his chair, looked at Sonia, and without
uttering a word sat down mechanically on her bed.

His sensations that moment were terribly like the moment when he had
stood over the old woman with the axe in his hand and felt that he must
not lose another minute.

Whats the matter? asked Sonia, dreadfully frightened.

He could not utter a word. This was not at all, not at all the way he
had intended to tell and he did not understand what was happening to
him now. She went up to him, softly, sat down on the bed beside him and
waited, not taking her eyes off him. Her heart throbbed and sank. It
was unendurable; he turned his deadly pale face to her. His lips worked,
helplessly struggling to utter something. A pang of terror passed
through Sonias heart.

Whats the matter? she repeated, drawing a little away from him.

Nothing, Sonia, dont be frightened.... Its nonsense. It really is
nonsense, if you think of it, he muttered, like a man in delirium. Why
have I come to torture you? he added suddenly, looking at her. Why,
really? I keep asking myself that question, Sonia....

He had perhaps been asking himself that question a quarter of an hour
before, but now he spoke helplessly, hardly knowing what he said and
feeling a continual tremor all over.

Oh, how you are suffering! she muttered in distress, looking intently
at him.

Its all nonsense.... Listen, Sonia. He suddenly smiled, a pale
helpless smile for two seconds. You remember what I meant to tell you
yesterday?

Sonia waited uneasily.

I said as I went away that perhaps I was saying good-bye for ever, but
that if I came to-day I would tell you who... who killed Lizaveta.

She began trembling all over.

Well, here Ive come to tell you.

Then you really meant it yesterday? she whispered with difficulty.
How do you know? she asked quickly, as though suddenly regaining her
reason.

Sonias face grew paler and paler, and she breathed painfully.

I know.

She paused a minute.

Have they found him? she asked timidly.

No.

Then how do you know about _it_? she asked again, hardly audibly and
again after a minutes pause.

He turned to her and looked very intently at her.

Guess, he said, with the same distorted helpless smile.

A shudder passed over her.

But you... why do you frighten me like this? she said, smiling like a
child.

I must be a great friend of _his_... since I know, Raskolnikov went
on, still gazing into her face, as though he could not turn his eyes
away. He... did not mean to kill that Lizaveta... he... killed her
accidentally.... He meant to kill the old woman when she was alone and
he went there... and then Lizaveta came in... he killed her too.

Another awful moment passed. Both still gazed at one another.

You cant guess, then? he asked suddenly, feeling as though he were
flinging himself down from a steeple.

N-no... whispered Sonia.

Take a good look.

As soon as he had said this again, the same familiar sensation froze his
heart. He looked at her and all at once seemed to see in her face the
face of Lizaveta. He remembered clearly the expression in Lizavetas
face, when he approached her with the axe and she stepped back to the
wall, putting out her hand, with childish terror in her face, looking
as little children do when they begin to be frightened of something,
looking intently and uneasily at what frightens them, shrinking back and
holding out their little hands on the point of crying. Almost the same
thing happened now to Sonia. With the same helplessness and the same
terror, she looked at him for a while and, suddenly putting out her left
hand, pressed her fingers faintly against his breast and slowly began to
get up from the bed, moving further from him and keeping her eyes fixed
even more immovably on him. Her terror infected him. The same fear
showed itself on his face. In the same way he stared at her and almost
with the same _childish_ smile.

Have you guessed? he whispered at last.

Good God! broke in an awful wail from her bosom.

She sank helplessly on the bed with her face in the pillows, but a
moment later she got up, moved quickly to him, seized both his hands
and, gripping them tight in her thin fingers, began looking into his
face again with the same intent stare. In this last desperate look she
tried to look into him and catch some last hope. But there was no hope;
there was no doubt remaining; it was all true! Later on, indeed, when
she recalled that moment, she thought it strange and wondered why she
had seen at once that there was no doubt. She could not have said, for
instance, that she had foreseen something of the sort--and yet now, as
soon as he told her, she suddenly fancied that she had really foreseen
this very thing.

Stop, Sonia, enough! dont torture me, he begged her miserably.

It was not at all, not at all like this he had thought of telling her,
but this is how it happened.

She jumped up, seeming not to know what she was doing, and, wringing her
hands, walked into the middle of the room; but quickly went back and sat
down again beside him, her shoulder almost touching his. All of a sudden
she started as though she had been stabbed, uttered a cry and fell on
her knees before him, she did not know why.

What have you done--what have you done to yourself? she said in
despair, and, jumping up, she flung herself on his neck, threw her arms
round him, and held him tightly.

Raskolnikov drew back and looked at her with a mournful smile.

You are a strange girl, Sonia--you kiss me and hug me when I tell you
about that.... You dont think what you are doing.

There is no one--no one in the whole world now so unhappy as you! she
cried in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, and she suddenly broke into
violent hysterical weeping.

A feeling long unfamiliar to him flooded his heart and softened it at
once. He did not struggle against it. Two tears started into his eyes
and hung on his eyelashes.

Then you wont leave me, Sonia? he said, looking at her almost with
hope.

No, no, never, nowhere! cried Sonia. I will follow you, I will follow
you everywhere. Oh, my God! Oh, how miserable I am!... Why, why didnt I
know you before! Why didnt you come before? Oh, dear!

Here I have come.

Yes, now! Whats to be done now?... Together, together! she repeated
as it were unconsciously, and she hugged him again. Ill follow you to
Siberia!

He recoiled at this, and the same hostile, almost haughty smile came to
his lips.

Perhaps I dont want to go to Siberia yet, Sonia, he said.

Sonia looked at him quickly.

Again after her first passionate, agonising sympathy for the unhappy man
the terrible idea of the murder overwhelmed her. In his changed tone she
seemed to hear the murderer speaking. She looked at him bewildered. She
knew nothing as yet, why, how, with what object it had been. Now all
these questions rushed at once into her mind. And again she could not
believe it: He, he is a murderer! Could it be true?

Whats the meaning of it? Where am I? she said in complete
bewilderment, as though still unable to recover herself. How could you,
you, a man like you.... How could you bring yourself to it?... What does
it mean?

Oh, well--to plunder. Leave off, Sonia, he answered wearily, almost
with vexation.

Sonia stood as though struck dumb, but suddenly she cried:

You were hungry! It was... to help your mother? Yes?

No, Sonia, no, he muttered, turning away and hanging his head. I was
not so hungry.... I certainly did want to help my mother, but... thats
not the real thing either.... Dont torture me, Sonia.

Sonia clasped her hands.

Could it, could it all be true? Good God, what a truth! Who could
believe it? And how could you give away your last farthing and yet
rob and murder! Ah, she cried suddenly, that money you gave Katerina
Ivanovna... that money.... Can that money...

No, Sonia, he broke in hurriedly, that money was not it. Dont worry
yourself! That money my mother sent me and it came when I was ill, the
day I gave it to you.... Razumihin saw it... he received it for me....
That money was mine--my own.

Sonia listened to him in bewilderment and did her utmost to comprehend.

And _that_ money.... I dont even know really whether there was any
money, he added softly, as though reflecting. I took a purse off her
neck, made of chamois leather... a purse stuffed full of something...
but I didnt look in it; I suppose I hadnt time.... And the
things--chains and trinkets--I buried under a stone with the purse next
morning in a yard off the V---- Prospect. They are all there now....

Sonia strained every nerve to listen.

Then why... why, you said you did it to rob, but you took nothing? she
asked quickly, catching at a straw.

I dont know.... I havent yet decided whether to take that money or
not, he said, musing again; and, seeming to wake up with a start, he
gave a brief ironical smile. Ach, what silly stuff I am talking, eh?

The thought flashed through Sonias mind, wasnt he mad? But she
dismissed it at once. No, it was something else. She could make
nothing of it, nothing.

Do you know, Sonia, he said suddenly with conviction, let me tell
you: if Id simply killed because I was hungry, laying stress on
every word and looking enigmatically but sincerely at her, I should
be _happy_ now. You must believe that! What would it matter to you, he
cried a moment later with a sort of despair, what would it matter to
you if I were to confess that I did wrong? What do you gain by such
a stupid triumph over me? Ah, Sonia, was it for that Ive come to you
to-day?

Again Sonia tried to say something, but did not speak.

I asked you to go with me yesterday because you are all I have left.

Go where? asked Sonia timidly.

Not to steal and not to murder, dont be anxious, he smiled bitterly.
We are so different.... And you know, Sonia, its only now, only this
moment that I understand _where_ I asked you to go with me yesterday!
Yesterday when I said it I did not know where. I asked you for one
thing, I came to you for one thing--not to leave me. You wont leave me,
Sonia?

She squeezed his hand.

And why, why did I tell her? Why did I let her know? he cried a minute
later in despair, looking with infinite anguish at her. Here you expect
an explanation from me, Sonia; you are sitting and waiting for it, I see
that. But what can I tell you? You wont understand and will only suffer
misery... on my account! Well, you are crying and embracing me again.
Why do you do it? Because I couldnt bear my burden and have come to
throw it on another: you suffer too, and I shall feel better! And can
you love such a mean wretch?

But arent you suffering, too? cried Sonia.

Again a wave of the same feeling surged into his heart, and again for an
instant softened it.

Sonia, I have a bad heart, take note of that. It may explain a great
deal. I have come because I am bad. There are men who wouldnt have
come. But I am a coward and... a mean wretch. But... never mind! Thats
not the point. I must speak now, but I dont know how to begin.

He paused and sank into thought.

Ach, we are so different, he cried again, we are not alike. And why,
why did I come? I shall never forgive myself that.

No, no, it was a good thing you came, cried Sonia. Its better I
should know, far better!

He looked at her with anguish.

What if it were really that? he said, as though reaching a conclusion.
Yes, thats what it was! I wanted to become a Napoleon, that is why I
killed her.... Do you understand now?

N-no, Sonia whispered navely and timidly. Only speak, speak, I shall
understand, I shall understand _in myself_! she kept begging him.

Youll understand? Very well, we shall see! He paused and was for some
time lost in meditation.

It was like this: I asked myself one day this question--what if
Napoleon, for instance, had happened to be in my place, and if he had
not had Toulon nor Egypt nor the passage of Mont Blanc to begin his
career with, but instead of all those picturesque and monumental things,
there had simply been some ridiculous old hag, a pawnbroker, who had
to be murdered too to get money from her trunk (for his career, you
understand). Well, would he have brought himself to that if there had
been no other means? Wouldnt he have felt a pang at its being so far
from monumental and... and sinful, too? Well, I must tell you that I
worried myself fearfully over that question so that I was awfully
ashamed when I guessed at last (all of a sudden, somehow) that it would
not have given him the least pang, that it would not even have struck
him that it was not monumental... that he would not have seen that there
was anything in it to pause over, and that, if he had had no other way,
he would have strangled her in a minute without thinking about it!
Well, I too... left off thinking about it... murdered her, following
his example. And thats exactly how it was! Do you think it funny? Yes,
Sonia, the funniest thing of all is that perhaps thats just how it
was.

Sonia did not think it at all funny.

You had better tell me straight out... without examples, she begged,
still more timidly and scarcely audibly.

He turned to her, looked sadly at her and took her hands.

You are right again, Sonia. Of course thats all nonsense, its almost
all talk! You see, you know of course that my mother has scarcely
anything, my sister happened to have a good education and was condemned
to drudge as a governess. All their hopes were centered on me. I was a
student, but I couldnt keep myself at the university and was forced
for a time to leave it. Even if I had lingered on like that, in ten
or twelve years I might (with luck) hope to be some sort of teacher or
clerk with a salary of a thousand roubles (he repeated it as though it
were a lesson) and by that time my mother would be worn out with grief
and anxiety and I could not succeed in keeping her in comfort while my
sister... well, my sister might well have fared worse! And its a hard
thing to pass everything by all ones life, to turn ones back upon
everything, to forget ones mother and decorously accept the insults
inflicted on ones sister. Why should one? When one has buried them to
burden oneself with others--wife and children--and to leave them again
without a farthing? So I resolved to gain possession of the old womans
money and to use it for my first years without worrying my mother,
to keep myself at the university and for a little while after leaving
it--and to do this all on a broad, thorough scale, so as to build up
a completely new career and enter upon a new life of independence....
Well... thats all.... Well, of course in killing the old woman I did
wrong.... Well, thats enough.

He struggled to the end of his speech in exhaustion and let his head
sink.

Oh, thats not it, thats not it, Sonia cried in distress. How could
one... no, thats not right, not right.

You see yourself that its not right. But Ive spoken truly, its the
truth.

As though that could be the truth! Good God!

Ive only killed a louse, Sonia, a useless, loathsome, harmful
creature.

A human being--a louse!

I too know it wasnt a louse, he answered, looking strangely at
her. But I am talking nonsense, Sonia, he added. Ive been talking
nonsense a long time.... Thats not it, you are right there. There were
quite, quite other causes for it! I havent talked to anyone for so
long, Sonia.... My head aches dreadfully now.

His eyes shone with feverish brilliance. He was almost delirious; an
uneasy smile strayed on his lips. His terrible exhaustion could be seen
through his excitement. Sonia saw how he was suffering. She too
was growing dizzy. And he talked so strangely; it seemed somehow
comprehensible, but yet... But how, how! Good God! And she wrung her
hands in despair.

No, Sonia, thats not it, he began again suddenly, raising his head,
as though a new and sudden train of thought had struck and as it were
roused him--thats not it! Better... imagine--yes, its certainly
better--imagine that I am vain, envious, malicious, base, vindictive
and... well, perhaps with a tendency to insanity. (Lets have it all out
at once! Theyve talked of madness already, I noticed.) I told you just
now I could not keep myself at the university. But do you know that
perhaps I might have done? My mother would have sent me what I needed
for the fees and I could have earned enough for clothes, boots and food,
no doubt. Lessons had turned up at half a rouble. Razumihin works! But I
turned sulky and wouldnt. (Yes, sulkiness, thats the right word for
it!) I sat in my room like a spider. Youve been in my den, youve seen
it.... And do you know, Sonia, that low ceilings and tiny rooms cramp
the soul and the mind? Ah, how I hated that garret! And yet I wouldnt
go out of it! I wouldnt on purpose! I didnt go out for days together,
and I wouldnt work, I wouldnt even eat, I just lay there doing
nothing. If Nastasya brought me anything, I ate it, if she didnt, I
went all day without; I wouldnt ask, on purpose, from sulkiness! At
night I had no light, I lay in the dark and I wouldnt earn money for
candles. I ought to have studied, but I sold my books; and the dust lies
an inch thick on the notebooks on my table. I preferred lying still and
thinking. And I kept thinking.... And I had dreams all the time, strange
dreams of all sorts, no need to describe! Only then I began to fancy
that... No, thats not it! Again I am telling you wrong! You see I kept
asking myself then: why am I so stupid that if others are stupid--and I
know they are--yet I wont be wiser? Then I saw, Sonia, that if one
waits for everyone to get wiser it will take too long.... Afterwards I
understood that that would never come to pass, that men wont change and
that nobody can alter it and that its not worth wasting effort over it.
Yes, thats so. Thats the law of their nature, Sonia,... thats so!...
And I know now, Sonia, that whoever is strong in mind and spirit will
have power over them. Anyone who is greatly daring is right in their
eyes. He who despises most things will be a lawgiver among them and he
who dares most of all will be most in the right! So it has been till now
and so it will always be. A man must be blind not to see it!

Though Raskolnikov looked at Sonia as he said this, he no longer cared
whether she understood or not. The fever had complete hold of him; he
was in a sort of gloomy ecstasy (he certainly had been too long without
talking to anyone). Sonia felt that his gloomy creed had become his
faith and code.

I divined then, Sonia, he went on eagerly, that power is only
vouchsafed to the man who dares to stoop and pick it up. There is only
one thing, one thing needful: one has only to dare! Then for the first
time in my life an idea took shape in my mind which no one had ever
thought of before me, no one! I saw clear as daylight how strange it is
that not a single person living in this mad world has had the daring to
go straight for it all and send it flying to the devil! I... I wanted
_to have the daring_... and I killed her. I only wanted to have the
daring, Sonia! That was the whole cause of it!

Oh hush, hush, cried Sonia, clasping her hands. You turned away from
God and God has smitten you, has given you over to the devil!

Then Sonia, when I used to lie there in the dark and all this became
clear to me, was it a temptation of the devil, eh?

Hush, dont laugh, blasphemer! You dont understand, you dont
understand! Oh God! He wont understand!

Hush, Sonia! I am not laughing. I know myself that it was the devil
leading me. Hush, Sonia, hush! he repeated with gloomy insistence. I
know it all, I have thought it all over and over and whispered it all
over to myself, lying there in the dark.... Ive argued it all over with
myself, every point of it, and I know it all, all! And how sick, how
sick I was then of going over it all! I have kept wanting to forget it
and make a new beginning, Sonia, and leave off thinking. And you dont
suppose that I went into it headlong like a fool? I went into it like a
wise man, and that was just my destruction. And you mustnt suppose that
I didnt know, for instance, that if I began to question myself whether
I had the right to gain power--I certainly hadnt the right--or that if
I asked myself whether a human being is a louse it proved that it wasnt
so for me, though it might be for a man who would go straight to his
goal without asking questions.... If I worried myself all those days,
wondering whether Napoleon would have done it or not, I felt clearly
of course that I wasnt Napoleon. I had to endure all the agony of that
battle of ideas, Sonia, and I longed to throw it off: I wanted to murder
without casuistry, to murder for my own sake, for myself alone! I didnt
want to lie about it even to myself. It wasnt to help my mother I did
the murder--thats nonsense--I didnt do the murder to gain wealth and
power and to become a benefactor of mankind. Nonsense! I simply did it;
I did the murder for myself, for myself alone, and whether I became a
benefactor to others, or spent my life like a spider catching men in
my web and sucking the life out of men, I couldnt have cared at that
moment.... And it was not the money I wanted, Sonia, when I did it. It
was not so much the money I wanted, but something else.... I know it all
now.... Understand me! Perhaps I should never have committed a murder
again. I wanted to find out something else; it was something else led
me on. I wanted to find out then and quickly whether I was a louse
like everybody else or a man. Whether I can step over barriers or
not, whether I dare stoop to pick up or not, whether I am a trembling
creature or whether I have the _right_...

To kill? Have the right to kill? Sonia clasped her hands.

Ach, Sonia! he cried irritably and seemed about to make some retort,
but was contemptuously silent. Dont interrupt me, Sonia. I want to
prove one thing only, that the devil led me on then and he has shown me
since that I had not the right to take that path, because I am just such
a louse as all the rest. He was mocking me and here Ive come to you
now! Welcome your guest! If I were not a louse, should I have come to
you? Listen: when I went then to the old womans I only went to
_try_.... You may be sure of that!

And you murdered her!

But how did I murder her? Is that how men do murders? Do men go to
commit a murder as I went then? I will tell you some day how I went!
Did I murder the old woman? I murdered myself, not her! I crushed myself
once for all, for ever.... But it was the devil that killed that old
woman, not I. Enough, enough, Sonia, enough! Let me be! he cried in a
sudden spasm of agony, let me be!

He leaned his elbows on his knees and squeezed his head in his hands as
in a vise.

What suffering! A wail of anguish broke from Sonia.

Well, what am I to do now? he asked, suddenly raising his head and
looking at her with a face hideously distorted by despair.

What are you to do? she cried, jumping up, and her eyes that had been
full of tears suddenly began to shine. Stand up! (She seized him by
the shoulder, he got up, looking at her almost bewildered.) Go at once,
this very minute, stand at the cross-roads, bow down, first kiss the
earth which you have defiled and then bow down to all the world and say
to all men aloud, I am a murderer! Then God will send you life again.
Will you go, will you go? she asked him, trembling all over, snatching
his two hands, squeezing them tight in hers and gazing at him with eyes
full of fire.

He was amazed at her sudden ecstasy.

You mean Siberia, Sonia? I must give myself up? he asked gloomily.

Suffer and expiate your sin by it, thats what you must do.

No! I am not going to them, Sonia!

But how will you go on living? What will you live for? cried Sonia,
how is it possible now? Why, how can you talk to your mother? (Oh, what
will become of them now?) But what am I saying? You have abandoned your
mother and your sister already. He has abandoned them already! Oh,
God! she cried, why, he knows it all himself. How, how can he live by
himself! What will become of you now?

Dont be a child, Sonia, he said softly. What wrong have I done
them? Why should I go to them? What should I say to them? Thats only a
phantom.... They destroy men by millions themselves and look on it as a
virtue. They are knaves and scoundrels, Sonia! I am not going to them.
And what should I say to them--that I murdered her, but did not dare to
take the money and hid it under a stone? he added with a bitter smile.
Why, they would laugh at me, and would call me a fool for not getting
it. A coward and a fool! They wouldnt understand and they dont deserve
to understand. Why should I go to them? I wont. Dont be a child,
Sonia....

It will be too much for you to bear, too much! she repeated, holding
out her hands in despairing supplication.

Perhaps Ive been unfair to myself, he observed gloomily, pondering,
perhaps after all I am a man and not a louse and Ive been in too great
a hurry to condemn myself. Ill make another fight for it.

A haughty smile appeared on his lips.

What a burden to bear! And your whole life, your whole life!

I shall get used to it, he said grimly and thoughtfully. Listen, he
began a minute later, stop crying, its time to talk of the facts: Ive
come to tell you that the police are after me, on my track....

Ach! Sonia cried in terror.

Well, why do you cry out? You want me to go to Siberia and now you are
frightened? But let me tell you: I shall not give myself up. I shall
make a struggle for it and they wont do anything to me. Theyve no real
evidence. Yesterday I was in great danger and believed I was lost; but
to-day things are going better. All the facts they know can be explained
two ways, thats to say I can turn their accusations to my credit, do
you understand? And I shall, for Ive learnt my lesson. But they will
certainly arrest me. If it had not been for something that happened,
they would have done so to-day for certain; perhaps even now they will
arrest me to-day.... But thats no matter, Sonia; theyll let me out
again... for there isnt any real proof against me, and there wont be,
I give you my word for it. And they cant convict a man on what they
have against me. Enough.... I only tell you that you may know.... I will
try to manage somehow to put it to my mother and sister so that they
wont be frightened.... My sisters future is secure, however, now, I
believe... and my mothers must be too.... Well, thats all. Be careful,
though. Will you come and see me in prison when I am there?

Oh, I will, I will.

They sat side by side, both mournful and dejected, as though they had
been cast up by the tempest alone on some deserted shore. He looked at
Sonia and felt how great was her love for him, and strange to say he
felt it suddenly burdensome and painful to be so loved. Yes, it was a
strange and awful sensation! On his way to see Sonia he had felt that
all his hopes rested on her; he expected to be rid of at least part
of his suffering, and now, when all her heart turned towards him, he
suddenly felt that he was immeasurably unhappier than before.

Sonia, he said, youd better not come and see me when I am in
prison.

Sonia did not answer, she was crying. Several minutes passed.

Have you a cross on you? she asked, as though suddenly thinking of it.

He did not at first understand the question.

No, of course not. Here, take this one, of cypress wood. I have
another, a copper one that belonged to Lizaveta. I changed with
Lizaveta: she gave me her cross and I gave her my little ikon. I will
wear Lizavetas now and give you this. Take it... its mine! Its mine,
you know, she begged him. We will go to suffer together, and together
we will bear our cross!

Give it me, said Raskolnikov.

He did not want to hurt her feelings. But immediately he drew back the
hand he held out for the cross.

Not now, Sonia. Better later, he added to comfort her.

Yes, yes, better, she repeated with conviction, when you go to meet
your suffering, then put it on. You will come to me, Ill put it on you,
we will pray and go together.

At that moment someone knocked three times at the door.

Sofya Semyonovna, may I come in? they heard in a very familiar and
polite voice.

Sonia rushed to the door in a fright. The flaxen head of Mr.
Lebeziatnikov appeared at the door.



