CHAPTER IV

At that moment the door was softly opened, and a young girl walked into
the room, looking timidly about her. Everyone turned towards her with
surprise and curiosity. At first sight, Raskolnikov did not recognise
her. It was Sofya Semyonovna Marmeladov. He had seen her yesterday for
the first time, but at such a moment, in such surroundings and in such
a dress, that his memory retained a very different image of her. Now she
was a modestly and poorly-dressed young girl, very young, indeed,
almost like a child, with a modest and refined manner, with a candid but
somewhat frightened-looking face. She was wearing a very plain indoor
dress, and had on a shabby old-fashioned hat, but she still carried a
parasol. Unexpectedly finding the room full of people, she was not so
much embarrassed as completely overwhelmed with shyness, like a
little child. She was even about to retreat. Oh... its you! said
Raskolnikov, extremely astonished, and he, too, was confused. He at once
recollected that his mother and sister knew through Luzhins letter
of some young woman of notorious behaviour. He had only just been
protesting against Luzhins calumny and declaring that he had seen the
girl last night for the first time, and suddenly she had walked in. He
remembered, too, that he had not protested against the expression of
notorious behaviour. All this passed vaguely and fleetingly through
his brain, but looking at her more intently, he saw that the humiliated
creature was so humiliated that he felt suddenly sorry for her. When she
made a movement to retreat in terror, it sent a pang to his heart.

I did not expect you, he said, hurriedly, with a look that made her
stop. Please sit down. You come, no doubt, from Katerina Ivanovna.
Allow me--not there. Sit here....

At Sonias entrance, Razumihin, who had been sitting on one of
Raskolnikovs three chairs, close to the door, got up to allow her to
enter. Raskolnikov had at first shown her the place on the sofa where
Zossimov had been sitting, but feeling that the sofa which served him
as a bed, was too _familiar_ a place, he hurriedly motioned her to
Razumihins chair.

You sit here, he said to Razumihin, putting him on the sofa.

Sonia sat down, almost shaking with terror, and looked timidly at the
two ladies. It was evidently almost inconceivable to herself that she
could sit down beside them. At the thought of it, she was so frightened
that she hurriedly got up again, and in utter confusion addressed
Raskolnikov.

I... I... have come for one minute. Forgive me for disturbing you, she
began falteringly. I come from Katerina Ivanovna, and she had no one to
send. Katerina Ivanovna told me to beg you... to be at the service... in
the morning... at Mitrofanievsky... and then... to us... to her...
to do her the honour... she told me to beg you... Sonia stammered and
ceased speaking.

I will try, certainly, most certainly, answered Raskolnikov. He,
too, stood up, and he, too, faltered and could not finish his sentence.
Please sit down, he said, suddenly. I want to talk to you. You are
perhaps in a hurry, but please, be so kind, spare me two minutes, and
he drew up a chair for her.

Sonia sat down again, and again timidly she took a hurried, frightened
look at the two ladies, and dropped her eyes. Raskolnikovs pale face
flushed, a shudder passed over him, his eyes glowed.

Mother, he said, firmly and insistently, this is Sofya Semyonovna
Marmeladov, the daughter of that unfortunate Mr. Marmeladov, who was run
over yesterday before my eyes, and of whom I was just telling you.

Pulcheria Alexandrovna glanced at Sonia, and slightly screwed up
her eyes. In spite of her embarrassment before Rodyas urgent and
challenging look, she could not deny herself that satisfaction. Dounia
gazed gravely and intently into the poor girls face, and scrutinised
her with perplexity. Sonia, hearing herself introduced, tried to raise
her eyes again, but was more embarrassed than ever.

I wanted to ask you, said Raskolnikov, hastily, how things were
arranged yesterday. You were not worried by the police, for instance?

No, that was all right... it was too evident, the cause of death...
they did not worry us... only the lodgers are angry.

Why?

At the bodys remaining so long. You see it is hot now. So that,
to-day, they will carry it to the cemetery, into the chapel, until
to-morrow. At first Katerina Ivanovna was unwilling, but now she sees
herself that its necessary...

To-day, then?

She begs you to do us the honour to be in the church to-morrow for the
service, and then to be present at the funeral lunch.

She is giving a funeral lunch?

Yes... just a little.... She told me to thank you very much for helping
us yesterday. But for you, we should have had nothing for the funeral.

All at once her lips and chin began trembling, but, with an effort, she
controlled herself, looking down again.

During the conversation, Raskolnikov watched her carefully. She had a
thin, very thin, pale little face, rather irregular and angular, with a
sharp little nose and chin. She could not have been called pretty, but
her blue eyes were so clear, and when they lighted up, there was such
a kindliness and simplicity in her expression that one could not help
being attracted. Her face, and her whole figure indeed, had another
peculiar characteristic. In spite of her eighteen years, she looked
almost a little girl--almost a child. And in some of her gestures, this
childishness seemed almost absurd.

But has Katerina Ivanovna been able to manage with such small means?
Does she even mean to have a funeral lunch? Raskolnikov asked,
persistently keeping up the conversation.

The coffin will be plain, of course... and everything will be plain, so
it wont cost much. Katerina Ivanovna and I have reckoned it all out, so
that there will be enough left... and Katerina Ivanovna was very anxious
it should be so. You know one cant... its a comfort to her... she is
like that, you know....

I understand, I understand... of course... why do you look at my room
like that? My mother has just said it is like a tomb.

You gave us everything yesterday, Sonia said suddenly, in reply, in a
loud rapid whisper; and again she looked down in confusion. Her lips
and chin were trembling once more. She had been struck at once
by Raskolnikovs poor surroundings, and now these words broke out
spontaneously. A silence followed. There was a light in Dounias eyes,
and even Pulcheria Alexandrovna looked kindly at Sonia.

Rodya, she said, getting up, we shall have dinner together, of
course. Come, Dounia.... And you, Rodya, had better go for a little
walk, and then rest and lie down before you come to see us.... I am
afraid we have exhausted you....

Yes, yes, Ill come, he answered, getting up fussily. But I have
something to see to.

But surely you will have dinner together? cried Razumihin, looking in
surprise at Raskolnikov. What do you mean?

Yes, yes, I am coming... of course, of course! And you stay a minute.
You do not want him just now, do you, mother? Or perhaps I am taking him
from you?

Oh, no, no. And will you, Dmitri Prokofitch, do us the favour of dining
with us?

Please do, added Dounia.

Razumihin bowed, positively radiant. For one moment, they were all
strangely embarrassed.

Good-bye, Rodya, that is till we meet. I do not like saying good-bye.
Good-bye, Nastasya. Ah, I have said good-bye again.

Pulcheria Alexandrovna meant to greet Sonia, too; but it somehow failed
to come off, and she went in a flutter out of the room.

But Avdotya Romanovna seemed to await her turn, and following her mother
out, gave Sonia an attentive, courteous bow. Sonia, in confusion, gave
a hurried, frightened curtsy. There was a look of poignant discomfort
in her face, as though Avdotya Romanovnas courtesy and attention were
oppressive and painful to her.

Dounia, good-bye, called Raskolnikov, in the passage. Give me your
hand.

Why, I did give it to you. Have you forgotten? said Dounia, turning
warmly and awkwardly to him.

Never mind, give it to me again. And he squeezed her fingers warmly.

Dounia smiled, flushed, pulled her hand away, and went off quite happy.

Come, thats capital, he said to Sonia, going back and looking
brightly at her. God give peace to the dead, the living have still to
live. That is right, isnt it?

Sonia looked surprised at the sudden brightness of his face. He looked
at her for some moments in silence. The whole history of the dead father
floated before his memory in those moments....

*****

Heavens, Dounia, Pulcheria Alexandrovna began, as soon as they were in
the street, I really feel relieved myself at coming away--more at ease.
How little did I think yesterday in the train that I could ever be glad
of that.

I tell you again, mother, he is still very ill. Dont you see it?
Perhaps worrying about us upset him. We must be patient, and much, much
can be forgiven.

Well, you were not very patient! Pulcheria Alexandrovna caught her up,
hotly and jealously. Do you know, Dounia, I was looking at you two. You
are the very portrait of him, and not so much in face as in soul. You
are both melancholy, both morose and hot-tempered, both haughty and both
generous.... Surely he cant be an egoist, Dounia. Eh? When I think of
what is in store for us this evening, my heart sinks!

Dont be uneasy, mother. What must be, will be.

Dounia, only think what a position we are in! What if Pyotr Petrovitch
breaks it off? poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna blurted out, incautiously.

He wont be worth much if he does, answered Dounia, sharply and
contemptuously.

We did well to come away, Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly broke in.
He was in a hurry about some business or other. If he gets out and has
a breath of air... it is fearfully close in his room.... But where is
one to get a breath of air here? The very streets here feel like shut-up
rooms. Good heavens! what a town!... stay... this side... they will
crush you--carrying something. Why, it is a piano they have got, I
declare... how they push!... I am very much afraid of that young woman,
too.

What young woman, mother?

Why, that Sofya Semyonovna, who was there just now.

Why?

I have a presentiment, Dounia. Well, you may believe it or not, but
as soon as she came in, that very minute, I felt that she was the chief
cause of the trouble....

Nothing of the sort! cried Dounia, in vexation. What nonsense, with
your presentiments, mother! He only made her acquaintance the evening
before, and he did not know her when she came in.

Well, you will see.... She worries me; but you will see, you will
see! I was so frightened. She was gazing at me with those eyes. I could
scarcely sit still in my chair when he began introducing her, do you
remember? It seems so strange, but Pyotr Petrovitch writes like that
about her, and he introduces her to us--to you! So he must think a great
deal of her.

People will write anything. We were talked about and written about,
too. Have you forgotten? I am sure that she is a good girl, and that it
is all nonsense.

God grant it may be!

And Pyotr Petrovitch is a contemptible slanderer, Dounia snapped out,
suddenly.

Pulcheria Alexandrovna was crushed; the conversation was not resumed.

*****

I will tell you what I want with you, said Raskolnikov, drawing
Razumihin to the window.

Then I will tell Katerina Ivanovna that you are coming, Sonia said
hurriedly, preparing to depart.

One minute, Sofya Semyonovna. We have no secrets. You are not in our
way. I want to have another word or two with you. Listen! he turned
suddenly to Razumihin again. You know that... whats his name...
Porfiry Petrovitch?

I should think so! He is a relation. Why? added the latter, with
interest.

Is not he managing that case... you know, about that murder?... You
were speaking about it yesterday.

Yes... well? Razumihins eyes opened wide.

He was inquiring for people who had pawned things, and I have some
pledges there, too--trifles--a ring my sister gave me as a keepsake when
I left home, and my fathers silver watch--they are only worth five or
six roubles altogether... but I value them. So what am I to do now? I
do not want to lose the things, especially the watch. I was quaking just
now, for fear mother would ask to look at it, when we spoke of Dounias
watch. It is the only thing of fathers left us. She would be ill if
it were lost. You know what women are. So tell me what to do. I know I
ought to have given notice at the police station, but would it not be
better to go straight to Porfiry? Eh? What do you think? The matter
might be settled more quickly. You see, mother may ask for it before
dinner.

Certainly not to the police station. Certainly to Porfiry, Razumihin
shouted in extraordinary excitement. Well, how glad I am. Let us go at
once. It is a couple of steps. We shall be sure to find him.

Very well, let us go.

And he will be very, very glad to make your acquaintance. I have
often talked to him of you at different times. I was speaking of you
yesterday. Let us go. So you knew the old woman? So thats it! It is all
turning out splendidly.... Oh, yes, Sofya Ivanovna...

Sofya Semyonovna, corrected Raskolnikov. Sofya Semyonovna, this is my
friend Razumihin, and he is a good man.

If you have to go now, Sonia was beginning, not looking at Razumihin
at all, and still more embarrassed.

Let us go, decided Raskolnikov. I will come to you to-day, Sofya
Semyonovna. Only tell me where you live.

He was not exactly ill at ease, but seemed hurried, and avoided her
eyes. Sonia gave her address, and flushed as she did so. They all went
out together.

Dont you lock up? asked Razumihin, following him on to the stairs.

Never, answered Raskolnikov. I have been meaning to buy a lock for
these two years. People are happy who have no need of locks, he said,
laughing, to Sonia. They stood still in the gateway.

Do you go to the right, Sofya Semyonovna? How did you find me, by the
way? he added, as though he wanted to say something quite different. He
wanted to look at her soft clear eyes, but this was not easy.

Why, you gave your address to Polenka yesterday.

Polenka? Oh, yes; Polenka, that is the little girl. She is your sister?
Did I give her the address?

Why, had you forgotten?

No, I remember.

I had heard my father speak of you... only I did not know your name,
and he did not know it. And now I came... and as I had learnt your name,
I asked to-day, Where does Mr. Raskolnikov live? I did not know you
had only a room too.... Good-bye, I will tell Katerina Ivanovna.

She was extremely glad to escape at last; she went away looking down,
hurrying to get out of sight as soon as possible, to walk the twenty
steps to the turning on the right and to be at last alone, and then
moving rapidly along, looking at no one, noticing nothing, to think, to
remember, to meditate on every word, every detail. Never, never had she
felt anything like this. Dimly and unconsciously a whole new world was
opening before her. She remembered suddenly that Raskolnikov meant to
come to her that day, perhaps at once!

Only not to-day, please, not to-day! she kept muttering with a sinking
heart, as though entreating someone, like a frightened child. Mercy! to
me... to that room... he will see... oh, dear!

She was not capable at that instant of noticing an unknown gentleman who
was watching her and following at her heels. He had accompanied her from
the gateway. At the moment when Razumihin, Raskolnikov, and she stood
still at parting on the pavement, this gentleman, who was just passing,
started on hearing Sonias words: and I asked where Mr. Raskolnikov
lived? He turned a rapid but attentive look upon all three, especially
upon Raskolnikov, to whom Sonia was speaking; then looked back and noted
the house. All this was done in an instant as he passed, and trying not
to betray his interest, he walked on more slowly as though waiting for
something. He was waiting for Sonia; he saw that they were parting, and
that Sonia was going home.

Home? Where? Ive seen that face somewhere, he thought. I must find
out.

At the turning he crossed over, looked round, and saw Sonia coming the
same way, noticing nothing. She turned the corner. He followed her on
the other side. After about fifty paces he crossed over again, overtook
her and kept two or three yards behind her.

He was a man about fifty, rather tall and thickly set, with broad high
shoulders which made him look as though he stooped a little. He wore
good and fashionable clothes, and looked like a gentleman of position.
He carried a handsome cane, which he tapped on the pavement at each
step; his gloves were spotless. He had a broad, rather pleasant face
with high cheek-bones and a fresh colour, not often seen in Petersburg.
His flaxen hair was still abundant, and only touched here and there with
grey, and his thick square beard was even lighter than his hair.
His eyes were blue and had a cold and thoughtful look; his lips were
crimson. He was a remarkedly well-preserved man and looked much younger
than his years.

When Sonia came out on the canal bank, they were the only two persons on
the pavement. He observed her dreaminess and preoccupation. On reaching
the house where she lodged, Sonia turned in at the gate; he followed
her, seeming rather surprised. In the courtyard she turned to the right
corner. Bah! muttered the unknown gentleman, and mounted the stairs
behind her. Only then Sonia noticed him. She reached the third storey,
turned down the passage, and rang at No. 9. On the door was inscribed
in chalk, Kapernaumov, Tailor. Bah! the stranger repeated again,
wondering at the strange coincidence, and he rang next door, at No. 8.
The doors were two or three yards apart.

You lodge at Kapernaumovs, he said, looking at Sonia and laughing.
He altered a waistcoat for me yesterday. I am staying close here at
Madame Resslichs. How odd! Sonia looked at him attentively.

We are neighbours, he went on gaily. I only came to town the day
before yesterday. Good-bye for the present.

Sonia made no reply; the door opened and she slipped in. She felt for
some reason ashamed and uneasy.

*****

On the way to Porfirys, Razumihin was obviously excited.

Thats capital, brother, he repeated several times, and I am glad! I
am glad!

What are you glad about? Raskolnikov thought to himself.

I didnt know that you pledged things at the old womans, too. And...
was it long ago? I mean, was it long since you were there?

What a simple-hearted fool he is!

When was it? Raskolnikov stopped still to recollect. Two or three
days before her death it must have been. But I am not going to redeem
the things now, he put in with a sort of hurried and conspicuous
solicitude about the things. Ive not more than a silver rouble
left... after last nights accursed delirium!

He laid special emphasis on the delirium.

Yes, yes, Razumihin hastened to agree--with what was not clear. Then
thats why you... were stuck... partly... you know in your delirium you
were continually mentioning some rings or chains! Yes, yes... thats
clear, its all clear now.

Hullo! How that idea must have got about among them. Here this man will
go to the stake for me, and I find him delighted at having it _cleared
up_ why I spoke of rings in my delirium! What a hold the idea must have
on all of them!

Shall we find him? he asked suddenly.

Oh, yes, Razumihin answered quickly. He is a nice fellow, you will
see, brother. Rather clumsy, that is to say, he is a man of polished
manners, but I mean clumsy in a different sense. He is an intelligent
fellow, very much so indeed, but he has his own range of ideas.... He
is incredulous, sceptical, cynical... he likes to impose on people, or
rather to make fun of them. His is the old, circumstantial method....
But he understands his work... thoroughly.... Last year he cleared up a
case of murder in which the police had hardly a clue. He is very, very
anxious to make your acquaintance!

On what grounds is he so anxious?

Oh, its not exactly... you see, since youve been ill I happen to have
mentioned you several times.... So, when he heard about you... about
your being a law student and not able to finish your studies, he said,
What a pity! And so I concluded... from everything together, not only
that; yesterday Zametov... you know, Rodya, I talked some nonsense on
the way home to you yesterday, when I was drunk... I am afraid, brother,
of your exaggerating it, you see.

What? That they think I am a madman? Maybe they are right, he said
with a constrained smile.

Yes, yes.... That is, pooh, no!... But all that I said (and there was
something else too) it was all nonsense, drunken nonsense.

But why are you apologising? I am so sick of it all! Raskolnikov cried
with exaggerated irritability. It was partly assumed, however.

I know, I know, I understand. Believe me, I understand. Ones ashamed
to speak of it.

If you are ashamed, then dont speak of it.

Both were silent. Razumihin was more than ecstatic and Raskolnikov
perceived it with repulsion. He was alarmed, too, by what Razumihin had
just said about Porfiry.

I shall have to pull a long face with him too, he thought, with a
beating heart, and he turned white, and do it naturally, too. But the
most natural thing would be to do nothing at all. Carefully do nothing
at all! No, _carefully_ would not be natural again.... Oh, well, we
shall see how it turns out.... We shall see... directly. Is it a good
thing to go or not? The butterfly flies to the light. My heart is
beating, thats whats bad!

In this grey house, said Razumihin.

The most important thing, does Porfiry know that I was at the old
hags flat yesterday... and asked about the blood? I must find that out
instantly, as soon as I go in, find out from his face; otherwise... Ill
find out, if its my ruin.

I say, brother, he said suddenly, addressing Razumihin, with a sly
smile, I have been noticing all day that you seem to be curiously
excited. Isnt it so?

Excited? Not a bit of it, said Razumihin, stung to the quick.

Yes, brother, I assure you its noticeable. Why, you sat on your chair
in a way you never do sit, on the edge somehow, and you seemed to be
writhing all the time. You kept jumping up for nothing. One moment you
were angry, and the next your face looked like a sweetmeat. You even
blushed; especially when you were invited to dinner, you blushed
awfully.

Nothing of the sort, nonsense! What do you mean?

But why are you wriggling out of it, like a schoolboy? By Jove, there
hes blushing again.

What a pig you are!

But why are you so shamefaced about it? Romeo! Stay, Ill tell of you
to-day. Ha-ha-ha! Ill make mother laugh, and someone else, too...

Listen, listen, listen, this is serious.... What next, you fiend!
 Razumihin was utterly overwhelmed, turning cold with horror. What will
you tell them? Come, brother... foo! what a pig you are!

You are like a summer rose. And if only you knew how it suits you; a
Romeo over six foot high! And how youve washed to-day--you cleaned your
nails, I declare. Eh? Thats something unheard of! Why, I do believe
youve got pomatum on your hair! Bend down.

Pig!

Raskolnikov laughed as though he could not restrain himself. So
laughing, they entered Porfiry Petrovitchs flat. This is what
Raskolnikov wanted: from within they could be heard laughing as they
came in, still guffawing in the passage.

Not a word here or Ill... brain you! Razumihin whispered furiously,
seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder.



