CHAPTER II

Ah these cigarettes! Porfiry Petrovitch ejaculated at last, having
lighted one. They are pernicious, positively pernicious, and yet I
cant give them up! I cough, I begin to have tickling in my throat and
a difficulty in breathing. You know I am a coward, I went lately to
Dr. B----n; he always gives at least half an hour to each patient. He
positively laughed looking at me; he sounded me: Tobaccos bad for
you, he said, your lungs are affected. But how am I to give it up?
What is there to take its place? I dont drink, thats the mischief,
he-he-he, that I dont. Everything is relative, Rodion Romanovitch,
everything is relative!

Why, hes playing his professional tricks again, Raskolnikov thought
with disgust. All the circumstances of their last interview suddenly
came back to him, and he felt a rush of the feeling that had come upon
him then.

I came to see you the day before yesterday, in the evening; you didnt
know? Porfiry Petrovitch went on, looking round the room. I came into
this very room. I was passing by, just as I did to-day, and I thought
Id return your call. I walked in as your door was wide open, I looked
round, waited and went out without leaving my name with your servant.
Dont you lock your door?

Raskolnikovs face grew more and more gloomy. Porfiry seemed to guess
his state of mind.

Ive come to have it out with you, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow!
I owe you an explanation and must give it to you, he continued with a
slight smile, just patting Raskolnikovs knee.

But almost at the same instant a serious and careworn look came into his
face; to his surprise Raskolnikov saw a touch of sadness in it. He had
never seen and never suspected such an expression in his face.

A strange scene passed between us last time we met, Rodion Romanovitch.
Our first interview, too, was a strange one; but then... and one thing
after another! This is the point: I have perhaps acted unfairly to you;
I feel it. Do you remember how we parted? Your nerves were unhinged and
your knees were shaking and so were mine. And, you know, our behaviour
was unseemly, even ungentlemanly. And yet we are gentlemen, above all,
in any case, gentlemen; that must be understood. Do you remember what we
came to?... and it was quite indecorous.

What is he up to, what does he take me for? Raskolnikov asked himself
in amazement, raising his head and looking with open eyes on Porfiry.

Ive decided openness is better between us, Porfiry Petrovitch went
on, turning his head away and dropping his eyes, as though unwilling to
disconcert his former victim and as though disdaining his former wiles.
Yes, such suspicions and such scenes cannot continue for long. Nikolay
put a stop to it, or I dont know what we might not have come to. That
damned workman was sitting at the time in the next room--can you realise
that? You know that, of course; and I am aware that he came to you
afterwards. But what you supposed then was not true: I had not sent for
anyone, I had made no kind of arrangements. You ask why I hadnt? What
shall I say to you? it had all come upon me so suddenly. I had scarcely
sent for the porters (you noticed them as you went out, I dare say).
An idea flashed upon me; I was firmly convinced at the time, you see,
Rodion Romanovitch. Come, I thought--even if I let one thing slip for
a time, I shall get hold of something else--I shant lose what I want,
anyway. You are nervously irritable, Rodion Romanovitch, by temperament;
its out of proportion with other qualities of your heart and character,
which I flatter myself I have to some extent divined. Of course I did
reflect even then that it does not always happen that a man gets up and
blurts out his whole story. It does happen sometimes, if you make a
man lose all patience, though even then its rare. I was capable of
realising that. If I only had a fact, I thought, the least little fact
to go upon, something I could lay hold of, something tangible, not
merely psychological. For if a man is guilty, you must be able to get
something substantial out of him; one may reckon upon most surprising
results indeed. I was reckoning on your temperament, Rodion Romanovitch,
on your temperament above all things! I had great hopes of you at that
time.

But what are you driving at now? Raskolnikov muttered at last, asking
the question without thinking.

What is he talking about? he wondered distractedly, does he really
take me to be innocent?

What am I driving at? Ive come to explain myself, I consider it my
duty, so to speak. I want to make clear to you how the whole business,
the whole misunderstanding arose. Ive caused you a great deal of
suffering, Rodion Romanovitch. I am not a monster. I understand what
it must mean for a man who has been unfortunate, but who is proud,
imperious and above all, impatient, to have to bear such treatment!
I regard you in any case as a man of noble character and not without
elements of magnanimity, though I dont agree with all your convictions.
I wanted to tell you this first, frankly and quite sincerely, for above
all I dont want to deceive you. When I made your acquaintance, I felt
attracted by you. Perhaps you will laugh at my saying so. You have a
right to. I know you disliked me from the first and indeed youve no
reason to like me. You may think what you like, but I desire now to do
all I can to efface that impression and to show that I am a man of heart
and conscience. I speak sincerely.

Porfiry Petrovitch made a dignified pause. Raskolnikov felt a rush of
renewed alarm. The thought that Porfiry believed him to be innocent
began to make him uneasy.

Its scarcely necessary to go over everything in detail, Porfiry
Petrovitch went on. Indeed, I could scarcely attempt it. To begin with
there were rumours. Through whom, how, and when those rumours came to
me... and how they affected you, I need not go into. My suspicions
were aroused by a complete accident, which might just as easily not have
happened. What was it? Hm! I believe there is no need to go into that
either. Those rumours and that accident led to one idea in my mind. I
admit it openly--for one may as well make a clean breast of it--I was
the first to pitch on you. The old womans notes on the pledges and
the rest of it--that all came to nothing. Yours was one of a hundred.
I happened, too, to hear of the scene at the office, from a man who
described it capitally, unconsciously reproducing the scene with great
vividness. It was just one thing after another, Rodion Romanovitch, my
dear fellow! How could I avoid being brought to certain ideas? From a
hundred rabbits you cant make a horse, a hundred suspicions dont make
a proof, as the English proverb says, but thats only from the rational
point of view--you cant help being partial, for after all a lawyer
is only human. I thought, too, of your article in that journal, do you
remember, on your first visit we talked of it? I jeered at you at the
time, but that was only to lead you on. I repeat, Rodion Romanovitch,
you are ill and impatient. That you were bold, headstrong, in earnest
and... had felt a great deal I recognised long before. I, too, have felt
the same, so that your article seemed familiar to me. It was conceived
on sleepless nights, with a throbbing heart, in ecstasy and suppressed
enthusiasm. And that proud suppressed enthusiasm in young people is
dangerous! I jeered at you then, but let me tell you that, as a literary
amateur, I am awfully fond of such first essays, full of the heat of
youth. There is a mistiness and a chord vibrating in the mist. Your
article is absurd and fantastic, but theres a transparent sincerity,
a youthful incorruptible pride and the daring of despair in it. Its a
gloomy article, but thats whats fine in it. I read your article and
put it aside, thinking as I did so that man wont go the common way.
Well, I ask you, after that as a preliminary, how could I help being
carried away by what followed? Oh, dear, I am not saying anything, I
am not making any statement now. I simply noted it at the time. What is
there in it? I reflected. Theres nothing in it, that is really nothing
and perhaps absolutely nothing. And its not at all the thing for
the prosecutor to let himself be carried away by notions: here I have
Nikolay on my hands with actual evidence against him--you may think what
you like of it, but its evidence. He brings in his psychology, too; one
has to consider him, too, for its a matter of life and death. Why am
I explaining this to you? That you may understand, and not blame my
malicious behaviour on that occasion. It was not malicious, I assure
you, he-he! Do you suppose I didnt come to search your room at the
time? I did, I did, he-he! I was here when you were lying ill in bed,
not officially, not in my own person, but I was here. Your room was
searched to the last thread at the first suspicion; but _umsonst_! I
thought to myself, now that man will come, will come of himself and
quickly, too; if hes guilty, hes sure to come. Another man wouldnt,
but he will. And you remember how Mr. Razumihin began discussing the
subject with you? We arranged that to excite you, so we purposely spread
rumours, that he might discuss the case with you, and Razumihin is not a
man to restrain his indignation. Mr. Zametov was tremendously struck by
your anger and your open daring. Think of blurting out in a restaurant
I killed her. It was too daring, too reckless. I thought so myself, if
he is guilty he will be a formidable opponent. That was what I thought
at the time. I was expecting you. But you simply bowled Zametov over
and... well, you see, it all lies in this--that this damnable psychology
can be taken two ways! Well, I kept expecting you, and so it was, you
came! My heart was fairly throbbing. Ach!

Now, why need you have come? Your laughter, too, as you came in, do you
remember? I saw it all plain as daylight, but if I hadnt expected you
so specially, I should not have noticed anything in your laughter. You
see what influence a mood has! Mr. Razumihin then--ah, that stone, that
stone under which the things were hidden! I seem to see it somewhere
in a kitchen garden. It was in a kitchen garden, you told Zametov and
afterwards you repeated that in my office? And when we began picking
your article to pieces, how you explained it! One could take every word
of yours in two senses, as though there were another meaning hidden.

So in this way, Rodion Romanovitch, I reached the furthest limit, and
knocking my head against a post, I pulled myself up, asking myself what
I was about. After all, I said, you can take it all in another sense if
you like, and its more natural so, indeed. I couldnt help admitting
it was more natural. I was bothered! No, Id better get hold of some
little fact I said. So when I heard of the bell-ringing, I held my
breath and was all in a tremor. Here is my little fact, thought I, and
I didnt think it over, I simply wouldnt. I would have given a thousand
roubles at that minute to have seen you with my own eyes, when you
walked a hundred paces beside that workman, after he had called you
murderer to your face, and you did not dare to ask him a question
all the way. And then what about your trembling, what about your
bell-ringing in your illness, in semi-delirium?

And so, Rodion Romanovitch, can you wonder that I played such pranks on
you? And what made you come at that very minute? Someone seemed to
have sent you, by Jove! And if Nikolay had not parted us... and do you
remember Nikolay at the time? Do you remember him clearly? It was a
thunderbolt, a regular thunderbolt! And how I met him! I didnt believe
in the thunderbolt, not for a minute. You could see it for yourself;
and how could I? Even afterwards, when you had gone and he began making
very, very plausible answers on certain points, so that I was surprised
at him myself, even then I didnt believe his story! You see what it is
to be as firm as a rock! No, thought I, _Morgenfrh_. What has Nikolay
got to do with it!

Razumihin told me just now that you think Nikolay guilty and had
yourself assured him of it....

His voice failed him, and he broke off. He had been listening in
indescribable agitation, as this man who had seen through and through
him, went back upon himself. He was afraid of believing it and did not
believe it. In those still ambiguous words he kept eagerly looking for
something more definite and conclusive.

Mr. Razumihin! cried Porfiry Petrovitch, seeming glad of a question
from Raskolnikov, who had till then been silent. He-he-he! But I had to
put Mr. Razumihin off; two is company, three is none. Mr. Razumihin is
not the right man, besides he is an outsider. He came running to me
with a pale face.... But never mind him, why bring him in? To return
to Nikolay, would you like to know what sort of a type he is, how I
understand him, that is? To begin with, he is still a child and not
exactly a coward, but something by way of an artist. Really, dont laugh
at my describing him so. He is innocent and responsive to influence. He
has a heart, and is a fantastic fellow. He sings and dances, he tells
stories, they say, so that people come from other villages to hear him.
He attends school too, and laughs till he cries if you hold up a finger
to him; he will drink himself senseless--not as a regular vice, but at
times, when people treat him, like a child. And he stole, too, then,
without knowing it himself, for How can it be stealing, if one picks it
up? And do you know he is an Old Believer, or rather a dissenter? There
have been Wanderers[*] in his family, and he was for two years in his
village under the spiritual guidance of a certain elder. I learnt all
this from Nikolay and from his fellow villagers. And whats more, he
wanted to run into the wilderness! He was full of fervour, prayed at
night, read the old books, the true ones, and read himself crazy.

     [*] A religious sect.--TRANSLATORS NOTE.

Petersburg had a great effect upon him, especially the women and the
wine. He responds to everything and he forgot the elder and all that. I
learnt that an artist here took a fancy to him, and used to go and see
him, and now this business came upon him.

Well, he was frightened, he tried to hang himself! He ran away! How can
one get over the idea the people have of Russian legal proceedings? The
very word trial frightens some of them. Whose fault is it? We shall
see what the new juries will do. God grant they do good! Well, in
prison, it seems, he remembered the venerable elder; the Bible, too,
made its appearance again. Do you know, Rodion Romanovitch, the force of
the word suffering among some of these people! Its not a question of
suffering for someones benefit, but simply, one must suffer. If they
suffer at the hands of the authorities, so much the better. In my time
there was a very meek and mild prisoner who spent a whole year in prison
always reading his Bible on the stove at night and he read himself
crazy, and so crazy, do you know, that one day, apropos of nothing, he
seized a brick and flung it at the governor; though he had done him
no harm. And the way he threw it too: aimed it a yard on one side
on purpose, for fear of hurting him. Well, we know what happens to
a prisoner who assaults an officer with a weapon. So he took his
suffering.

So I suspect now that Nikolay wants to take his suffering or something
of the sort. I know it for certain from facts, indeed. Only he doesnt
know that I know. What, you dont admit that there are such fantastic
people among the peasants? Lots of them. The elder now has begun
influencing him, especially since he tried to hang himself. But hell
come and tell me all himself. You think hell hold out? Wait a bit,
hell take his words back. I am waiting from hour to hour for him to
come and abjure his evidence. I have come to like that Nikolay and am
studying him in detail. And what do you think? He-he! He answered me
very plausibly on some points, he obviously had collected some evidence
and prepared himself cleverly. But on other points he is simply at sea,
knows nothing and doesnt even suspect that he doesnt know!

No, Rodion Romanovitch, Nikolay doesnt come in! This is a fantastic,
gloomy business, a modern case, an incident of to-day when the heart
of man is troubled, when the phrase is quoted that blood renews, when
comfort is preached as the aim of life. Here we have bookish dreams, a
heart unhinged by theories. Here we see resolution in the first stage,
but resolution of a special kind: he resolved to do it like jumping over
a precipice or from a bell tower and his legs shook as he went to the
crime. He forgot to shut the door after him, and murdered two people for
a theory. He committed the murder and couldnt take the money, and what
he did manage to snatch up he hid under a stone. It wasnt enough for
him to suffer agony behind the door while they battered at the door and
rung the bell, no, he had to go to the empty lodging, half delirious, to
recall the bell-ringing, he wanted to feel the cold shiver over again....
Well, that we grant, was through illness, but consider this: he is
a murderer, but looks upon himself as an honest man, despises others,
poses as injured innocence. No, thats not the work of a Nikolay, my
dear Rodion Romanovitch!

All that had been said before had sounded so like a recantation that
these words were too great a shock. Raskolnikov shuddered as though he
had been stabbed.

Then... who then... is the murderer? he asked in a breathless voice,
unable to restrain himself.

Porfiry Petrovitch sank back in his chair, as though he were amazed at
the question.

Who is the murderer? he repeated, as though unable to believe his
ears. Why, _you_, Rodion Romanovitch! You are the murderer, he added,
almost in a whisper, in a voice of genuine conviction.

Raskolnikov leapt from the sofa, stood up for a few seconds and sat down
again without uttering a word. His face twitched convulsively.

Your lip is twitching just as it did before, Porfiry Petrovitch
observed almost sympathetically. Youve been misunderstanding me, I
think, Rodion Romanovitch, he added after a brief pause, thats why
you are so surprised. I came on purpose to tell you everything and deal
openly with you.

It was not I murdered her, Raskolnikov whispered like a frightened
child caught in the act.

No, it was you, you Rodion Romanovitch, and no one else, Porfiry
whispered sternly, with conviction.

They were both silent and the silence lasted strangely long, about ten
minutes. Raskolnikov put his elbow on the table and passed his fingers
through his hair. Porfiry Petrovitch sat quietly waiting. Suddenly
Raskolnikov looked scornfully at Porfiry.

You are at your old tricks again, Porfiry Petrovitch! Your old method
again. I wonder you dont get sick of it!

Oh, stop that, what does that matter now? It would be a different
matter if there were witnesses present, but we are whispering alone. You
see yourself that I have not come to chase and capture you like a hare.
Whether you confess it or not is nothing to me now; for myself, I am
convinced without it.

If so, what did you come for? Raskolnikov asked irritably. I ask you
the same question again: if you consider me guilty, why dont you take
me to prison?

Oh, thats your question! I will answer you, point for point. In the
first place, to arrest you so directly is not to my interest.

How so? If you are convinced you ought....

Ach, what if I am convinced? Thats only my dream for the time. Why
should I put you in safety? You know thats it, since you ask me to do
it. If I confront you with that workman for instance and you say to him
were you drunk or not? Who saw me with you? I simply took you to be
drunk, and you were drunk, too. Well, what could I answer, especially
as your story is a more likely one than his? for theres nothing but
psychology to support his evidence--thats almost unseemly with his ugly
mug, while you hit the mark exactly, for the rascal is an inveterate
drunkard and notoriously so. And I have myself admitted candidly several
times already that that psychology can be taken in two ways and that the
second way is stronger and looks far more probable, and that apart from
that I have as yet nothing against you. And though I shall put you in
prison and indeed have come--quite contrary to etiquette--to inform you
of it beforehand, yet I tell you frankly, also contrary to etiquette,
that it wont be to my advantage. Well, secondly, Ive come to you
because...

Yes, yes, secondly? Raskolnikov was listening breathless.

Because, as I told you just now, I consider I owe you an explanation. I
dont want you to look upon me as a monster, as I have a genuine liking
for you, you may believe me or not. And in the third place Ive come to
you with a direct and open proposition--that you should surrender
and confess. It will be infinitely more to your advantage and to my
advantage too, for my task will be done. Well, is this open on my part
or not?

Raskolnikov thought a minute.

Listen, Porfiry Petrovitch. You said just now you have nothing but
psychology to go on, yet now youve gone on mathematics. Well, what if
you are mistaken yourself, now?

No, Rodion Romanovitch, I am not mistaken. I have a little fact even
then, Providence sent it me.

What little fact?

I wont tell you what, Rodion Romanovitch. And in any case, I havent
the right to put it off any longer, I must arrest you. So think it over:
it makes no difference to me _now_ and so I speak only for your sake.
Believe me, it will be better, Rodion Romanovitch.

Raskolnikov smiled malignantly.

Thats not simply ridiculous, its positively shameless. Why, even if I
were guilty, which I dont admit, what reason should I have to confess,
when you tell me yourself that I shall be in greater safety in prison?

Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, dont put too much faith in words, perhaps
prison will not be altogether a restful place. Thats only theory and
my theory, and what authority am I for you? Perhaps, too, even now I am
hiding something from you? I cant lay bare everything, he-he! And how
can you ask what advantage? Dont you know how it would lessen your
sentence? You would be confessing at a moment when another man has taken
the crime on himself and so has muddled the whole case. Consider that! I
swear before God that I will so arrange that your confession shall
come as a complete surprise. We will make a clean sweep of all these
psychological points, of a suspicion against you, so that your crime
will appear to have been something like an aberration, for in truth it
was an aberration. I am an honest man, Rodion Romanovitch, and will keep
my word.

Raskolnikov maintained a mournful silence and let his head sink
dejectedly. He pondered a long while and at last smiled again, but his
smile was sad and gentle.

No! he said, apparently abandoning all attempt to keep up appearances
with Porfiry, its not worth it, I dont care about lessening the
sentence!

Thats just what I was afraid of! Porfiry cried warmly and, as it
seemed, involuntarily. Thats just what I feared, that you wouldnt
care about the mitigation of sentence.

Raskolnikov looked sadly and expressively at him.

Ah, dont disdain life! Porfiry went on. You have a great deal of
it still before you. How can you say you dont want a mitigation of
sentence? You are an impatient fellow!

A great deal of what lies before me?

Of life. What sort of prophet are you, do you know much about it? Seek
and ye shall find. This may be Gods means for bringing you to Him. And
its not for ever, the bondage....

The time will be shortened, laughed Raskolnikov.

Why, is it the bourgeois disgrace you are afraid of? It may be that you
are afraid of it without knowing it, because you are young! But anyway
_you_ shouldnt be afraid of giving yourself up and confessing.

Ach, hang it! Raskolnikov whispered with loathing and contempt, as
though he did not want to speak aloud.

He got up again as though he meant to go away, but sat down again in
evident despair.

Hang it, if you like! Youve lost faith and you think that I am
grossly flattering you; but how long has your life been? How much do
you understand? You made up a theory and then were ashamed that it broke
down and turned out to be not at all original! It turned out something
base, thats true, but you are not hopelessly base. By no means so base!
At least you didnt deceive yourself for long, you went straight to the
furthest point at one bound. How do I regard you? I regard you as one
of those men who would stand and smile at their torturer while he cuts
their entrails out, if only they have found faith or God. Find it and
you will live. You have long needed a change of air. Suffering, too,
is a good thing. Suffer! Maybe Nikolay is right in wanting to suffer.
I know you dont believe in it--but dont be over-wise; fling yourself
straight into life, without deliberation; dont be afraid--the flood
will bear you to the bank and set you safe on your feet again. What
bank? How can I tell? I only believe that you have long life before
you. I know that you take all my words now for a set speech prepared
beforehand, but maybe you will remember them after. They may be of use
some time. Thats why I speak. Its as well that you only killed the
old woman. If youd invented another theory you might perhaps have
done something a thousand times more hideous. You ought to thank God,
perhaps. How do you know? Perhaps God is saving you for something.
But keep a good heart and have less fear! Are you afraid of the great
expiation before you? No, it would be shameful to be afraid of it. Since
you have taken such a step, you must harden your heart. There is justice
in it. You must fulfil the demands of justice. I know that you dont
believe it, but indeed, life will bring you through. You will live it
down in time. What you need now is fresh air, fresh air, fresh air!

Raskolnikov positively started.

But who are you? what prophet are you? From the height of what majestic
calm do you proclaim these words of wisdom?

Who am I? I am a man with nothing to hope for, thats all. A man
perhaps of feeling and sympathy, maybe of some knowledge too, but my day
is over. But you are a different matter, there is life waiting for you.
Though, who knows? maybe your life, too, will pass off in smoke and come
to nothing. Come, what does it matter, that you will pass into another
class of men? Its not comfort you regret, with your heart! What of
it that perhaps no one will see you for so long? Its not time, but
yourself that will decide that. Be the sun and all will see you. The
sun has before all to be the sun. Why are you smiling again? At my being
such a Schiller? I bet youre imagining that I am trying to get round
you by flattery. Well, perhaps I am, he-he-he! Perhaps youd better not
believe my word, perhaps youd better never believe it altogether--Im
made that way, I confess it. But let me add, you can judge for yourself,
I think, how far I am a base sort of man and how far I am honest.

When do you mean to arrest me?

Well, I can let you walk about another day or two. Think it over, my
dear fellow, and pray to God. Its more in your interest, believe me.

And what if I run away? asked Raskolnikov with a strange smile.

No, you wont run away. A peasant would run away, a fashionable
dissenter would run away, the flunkey of another mans thought, for
youve only to show him the end of your little finger and hell be ready
to believe in anything for the rest of his life. But youve ceased to
believe in your theory already, what will you run away with? And what
would you do in hiding? It would be hateful and difficult for you, and
what you need more than anything in life is a definite position, an
atmosphere to suit you. And what sort of atmosphere would you have? If
you ran away, youd come back to yourself. _You cant get on without
us._ And if I put you in prison--say youve been there a month, or two,
or three--remember my word, youll confess of yourself and perhaps to
your own surprise. You wont know an hour beforehand that you are coming
with a confession. I am convinced that you will decide, to take your
suffering. You dont believe my words now, but youll come to it of
yourself. For suffering, Rodion Romanovitch, is a great thing. Never
mind my having grown fat, I know all the same. Dont laugh at it,
theres an idea in suffering, Nikolay is right. No, you wont run away,
Rodion Romanovitch.

Raskolnikov got up and took his cap. Porfiry Petrovitch also rose.

Are you going for a walk? The evening will be fine, if only we dont
have a storm. Though it would be a good thing to freshen the air.

He, too, took his cap.

Porfiry Petrovitch, please dont take up the notion that I have
confessed to you to-day, Raskolnikov pronounced with sullen insistence.
Youre a strange man and I have listened to you from simple curiosity.
But I have admitted nothing, remember that!

Oh, I know that, Ill remember. Look at him, hes trembling! Dont
be uneasy, my dear fellow, have it your own way. Walk about a bit, you
wont be able to walk too far. If anything happens, I have one request
to make of you, he added, dropping his voice. Its an awkward one, but
important. If anything were to happen (though indeed I dont believe
in it and think you quite incapable of it), yet in case you were taken
during these forty or fifty hours with the notion of putting an end to
the business in some other way, in some fantastic fashion--laying hands
on yourself--(its an absurd proposition, but you must forgive me for
it) do leave a brief but precise note, only two lines, and mention the
stone. It will be more generous. Come, till we meet! Good thoughts and
sound decisions to you!

Porfiry went out, stooping and avoiding looking at Raskolnikov. The
latter went to the window and waited with irritable impatience till he
calculated that Porfiry had reached the street and moved away. Then he
too went hurriedly out of the room.



