CHAPTER VII

The same day, about seven oclock in the evening, Raskolnikov was on
his way to his mothers and sisters lodging--the lodging in Bakaleyevs
house which Razumihin had found for them. The stairs went up from
the street. Raskolnikov walked with lagging steps, as though still
hesitating whether to go or not. But nothing would have turned him back:
his decision was taken.

Besides, it doesnt matter, they still know nothing, he thought, and
they are used to thinking of me as eccentric.

He was appallingly dressed: his clothes torn and dirty, soaked with a
nights rain. His face was almost distorted from fatigue, exposure, the
inward conflict that had lasted for twenty-four hours. He had spent all
the previous night alone, God knows where. But anyway he had reached a
decision.

He knocked at the door which was opened by his mother. Dounia was not
at home. Even the servant happened to be out. At first Pulcheria
Alexandrovna was speechless with joy and surprise; then she took him by
the hand and drew him into the room.

Here you are! she began, faltering with joy. Dont be angry with
me, Rodya, for welcoming you so foolishly with tears: I am laughing not
crying. Did you think I was crying? No, I am delighted, but Ive got
into such a stupid habit of shedding tears. Ive been like that ever
since your fathers death. I cry for anything. Sit down, dear boy, you
must be tired; I see you are. Ah, how muddy you are.

I was in the rain yesterday, mother.... Raskolnikov began.

No, no, Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly interrupted, you thought I
was going to cross-question you in the womanish way I used to; dont be
anxious, I understand, I understand it all: now Ive learned the ways
here and truly I see for myself that they are better. Ive made up my
mind once for all: how could I understand your plans and expect you to
give an account of them? God knows what concerns and plans you may have,
or what ideas you are hatching; so its not for me to keep nudging your
elbow, asking you what you are thinking about? But, my goodness! why
am I running to and fro as though I were crazy...? I am reading your
article in the magazine for the third time, Rodya. Dmitri Prokofitch
brought it to me. Directly I saw it I cried out to myself: There,
foolish one, I thought, thats what he is busy about; thats the
solution of the mystery! Learned people are always like that. He may
have some new ideas in his head just now; he is thinking them over and I
worry him and upset him. I read it, my dear, and of course there was a
great deal I did not understand; but thats only natural--how should I?

Show me, mother.

Raskolnikov took the magazine and glanced at his article. Incongruous
as it was with his mood and his circumstances, he felt that strange and
bitter sweet sensation that every author experiences the first time he
sees himself in print; besides, he was only twenty-three. It lasted only
a moment. After reading a few lines he frowned and his heart throbbed
with anguish. He recalled all the inward conflict of the preceding
months. He flung the article on the table with disgust and anger.

But, however foolish I may be, Rodya, I can see for myself that you
will very soon be one of the leading--if not the leading man--in the
world of Russian thought. And they dared to think you were mad! You
dont know, but they really thought that. Ah, the despicable creatures,
how could they understand genius! And Dounia, Dounia was all but
believing it--what do you say to that? Your father sent twice to
magazines--the first time poems (Ive got the manuscript and will show
you) and the second time a whole novel (I begged him to let me copy it
out) and how we prayed that they should be taken--they werent! I was
breaking my heart, Rodya, six or seven days ago over your food and your
clothes and the way you are living. But now I see again how foolish
I was, for you can attain any position you like by your intellect and
talent. No doubt you dont care about that for the present and you are
occupied with much more important matters....

Dounias not at home, mother?

No, Rodya. I often dont see her; she leaves me alone. Dmitri
Prokofitch comes to see me, its so good of him, and he always talks
about you. He loves you and respects you, my dear. I dont say that
Dounia is very wanting in consideration. I am not complaining. She has
her ways and I have mine; she seems to have got some secrets of late and
I never have any secrets from you two. Of course, I am sure that Dounia
has far too much sense, and besides she loves you and me... but I dont
know what it will all lead to. Youve made me so happy by coming now,
Rodya, but she has missed you by going out; when she comes in Ill tell
her: Your brother came in while you were out. Where have you been all
this time? You mustnt spoil me, Rodya, you know; come when you can,
but if you cant, it doesnt matter, I can wait. I shall know, anyway,
that you are fond of me, that will be enough for me. I shall read what
you write, I shall hear about you from everyone, and sometimes youll
come yourself to see me. What could be better? Here youve come now to
comfort your mother, I see that.

Here Pulcheria Alexandrovna began to cry.

Here I am again! Dont mind my foolishness. My goodness, why am I
sitting here? she cried, jumping up. There is coffee and I dont offer
you any. Ah, thats the selfishness of old age. Ill get it at once!

Mother, dont trouble, I am going at once. I havent come for that.
Please listen to me.

Pulcheria Alexandrovna went up to him timidly.

Mother, whatever happens, whatever you hear about me, whatever you are
told about me, will you always love me as you do now? he asked suddenly
from the fullness of his heart, as though not thinking of his words and
not weighing them.

Rodya, Rodya, what is the matter? How can you ask me such a question?
Why, who will tell me anything about you? Besides, I shouldnt believe
anyone, I should refuse to listen.

Ive come to assure you that Ive always loved you and I am glad
that we are alone, even glad Dounia is out, he went on with the same
impulse. I have come to tell you that though you will be unhappy, you
must believe that your son loves you now more than himself, and that all
you thought about me, that I was cruel and didnt care about you, was
all a mistake. I shall never cease to love you.... Well, thats enough:
I thought I must do this and begin with this....

Pulcheria Alexandrovna embraced him in silence, pressing him to her
bosom and weeping gently.

I dont know what is wrong with you, Rodya, she said at last. Ive
been thinking all this time that we were simply boring you and now I see
that there is a great sorrow in store for you, and thats why you are
miserable. Ive foreseen it a long time, Rodya. Forgive me for speaking
about it. I keep thinking about it and lie awake at nights. Your sister
lay talking in her sleep all last night, talking of nothing but you. I
caught something, but I couldnt make it out. I felt all the morning
as though I were going to be hanged, waiting for something, expecting
something, and now it has come! Rodya, Rodya, where are you going? You
are going away somewhere?

Yes.

Thats what I thought! I can come with you, you know, if you need
me. And Dounia, too; she loves you, she loves you dearly--and Sofya
Semyonovna may come with us if you like. You see, I am glad to look upon
her as a daughter even... Dmitri Prokofitch will help us to go together.
But... where... are you going?

Good-bye, mother.

What, to-day? she cried, as though losing him for ever.

I cant stay, I must go now....

And cant I come with you?

No, but kneel down and pray to God for me. Your prayer perhaps will
reach Him.

Let me bless you and sign you with the cross. Thats right, thats
right. Oh, God, what are we doing?

Yes, he was glad, he was very glad that there was no one there, that
he was alone with his mother. For the first time after all those awful
months his heart was softened. He fell down before her, he kissed her
feet and both wept, embracing. And she was not surprised and did not
question him this time. For some days she had realised that something
awful was happening to her son and that now some terrible minute had
come for him.

Rodya, my darling, my first born, she said sobbing, now you are just
as when you were little. You would run like this to me and hug me and
kiss me. When your father was living and we were poor, you comforted us
simply by being with us and when I buried your father, how often we
wept together at his grave and embraced, as now. And if Ive been crying
lately, its that my mothers heart had a foreboding of trouble. The
first time I saw you, that evening, you remember, as soon as we arrived
here, I guessed simply from your eyes. My heart sank at once, and to-day
when I opened the door and looked at you, I thought the fatal hour had
come. Rodya, Rodya, you are not going away to-day?

No!

Youll come again?

Yes... Ill come.

Rodya, dont be angry, I dont dare to question you. I know I mustnt.
Only say two words to me--is it far where you are going?

Very far.

What is awaiting you there? Some post or career for you?

What God sends... only pray for me. Raskolnikov went to the door, but
she clutched him and gazed despairingly into his eyes. Her face worked
with terror.

Enough, mother, said Raskolnikov, deeply regretting that he had come.

Not for ever, its not yet for ever? Youll come, youll come
to-morrow?

I will, I will, good-bye. He tore himself away at last.

It was a warm, fresh, bright evening; it had cleared up in the morning.
Raskolnikov went to his lodgings; he made haste. He wanted to finish all
before sunset. He did not want to meet anyone till then. Going up the
stairs he noticed that Nastasya rushed from the samovar to watch him
intently. Can anyone have come to see me? he wondered. He had a
disgusted vision of Porfiry. But opening his door he saw Dounia. She
was sitting alone, plunged in deep thought, and looked as though she had
been waiting a long time. He stopped short in the doorway. She rose from
the sofa in dismay and stood up facing him. Her eyes, fixed upon him,
betrayed horror and infinite grief. And from those eyes alone he saw at
once that she knew.

Am I to come in or go away? he asked uncertainly.

Ive been all day with Sofya Semyonovna. We were both waiting for you.
We thought that you would be sure to come there.

Raskolnikov went into the room and sank exhausted on a chair.

I feel weak, Dounia, I am very tired; and I should have liked at this
moment to be able to control myself.

He glanced at her mistrustfully.

Where were you all night?

I dont remember clearly. You see, sister, I wanted to make up my mind
once for all, and several times I walked by the Neva, I remember that
I wanted to end it all there, but... I couldnt make up my mind, he
whispered, looking at her mistrustfully again.

Thank God! That was just what we were afraid of, Sofya Semyonovna and
I. Then you still have faith in life? Thank God, thank God!

Raskolnikov smiled bitterly.

I havent faith, but I have just been weeping in mothers arms; I
havent faith, but I have just asked her to pray for me. I dont know
how it is, Dounia, I dont understand it.

Have you been at mothers? Have you told her? cried Dounia,
horror-stricken. Surely you havent done that?

No, I didnt tell her... in words; but she understood a great deal.
She heard you talking in your sleep. I am sure she half understands it
already. Perhaps I did wrong in going to see her. I dont know why I did
go. I am a contemptible person, Dounia.

A contemptible person, but ready to face suffering! You are, arent
you?

Yes, I am going. At once. Yes, to escape the disgrace I thought of
drowning myself, Dounia, but as I looked into the water, I thought that
if I had considered myself strong till now Id better not be afraid of
disgrace, he said, hurrying on. Its pride, Dounia.

Pride, Rodya.

There was a gleam of fire in his lustreless eyes; he seemed to be glad
to think that he was still proud.

You dont think, sister, that I was simply afraid of the water? he
asked, looking into her face with a sinister smile.

Oh, Rodya, hush! cried Dounia bitterly. Silence lasted for two
minutes. He sat with his eyes fixed on the floor; Dounia stood at the
other end of the table and looked at him with anguish. Suddenly he got
up.

Its late, its time to go! I am going at once to give myself up. But I
dont know why I am going to give myself up.

Big tears fell down her cheeks.

You are crying, sister, but can you hold out your hand to me?

You doubted it?

She threw her arms round him.

Arent you half expiating your crime by facing the suffering? she
cried, holding him close and kissing him.

Crime? What crime? he cried in sudden fury. That I killed a vile
noxious insect, an old pawnbroker woman, of use to no one!... Killing
her was atonement for forty sins. She was sucking the life out of poor
people. Was that a crime? I am not thinking of it and I am not thinking
of expiating it, and why are you all rubbing it in on all sides? A
crime! a crime! Only now I see clearly the imbecility of my cowardice,
now that I have decided to face this superfluous disgrace. Its simply
because I am contemptible and have nothing in me that I have decided to,
perhaps too for my advantage, as that... Porfiry... suggested!

Brother, brother, what are you saying? Why, you have shed blood? cried
Dounia in despair.

Which all men shed, he put in almost frantically, which flows and has
always flowed in streams, which is spilt like champagne, and for which
men are crowned in the Capitol and are called afterwards benefactors of
mankind. Look into it more carefully and understand it! I too wanted to
do good to men and would have done hundreds, thousands of good deeds
to make up for that one piece of stupidity, not stupidity even, simply
clumsiness, for the idea was by no means so stupid as it seems now
that it has failed.... (Everything seems stupid when it fails.) By that
stupidity I only wanted to put myself into an independent position, to
take the first step, to obtain means, and then everything would have
been smoothed over by benefits immeasurable in comparison.... But I...
I couldnt carry out even the first step, because I am contemptible,
thats whats the matter! And yet I wont look at it as you do. If I had
succeeded I should have been crowned with glory, but now Im trapped.

But thats not so, not so! Brother, what are you saying?

Ah, its not picturesque, not sthetically attractive! I fail to
understand why bombarding people by regular siege is more honourable.
The fear of appearances is the first symptom of impotence. Ive never,
never recognised this more clearly than now, and I am further than ever
from seeing that what I did was a crime. Ive never, never been stronger
and more convinced than now.

The colour had rushed into his pale exhausted face, but as he uttered
his last explanation, he happened to meet Dounias eyes and he saw such
anguish in them that he could not help being checked. He felt that he
had, anyway, made these two poor women miserable, that he was, anyway,
the cause...

Dounia darling, if I am guilty forgive me (though I cannot be forgiven
if I am guilty). Good-bye! We wont dispute. Its time, high time to go.
Dont follow me, I beseech you, I have somewhere else to go.... But you
go at once and sit with mother. I entreat you to! Its my last request
of you. Dont leave her at all; I left her in a state of anxiety, that
she is not fit to bear; she will die or go out of her mind. Be with
her! Razumihin will be with you. Ive been talking to him.... Dont cry
about me: Ill try to be honest and manly all my life, even if I am a
murderer. Perhaps I shall some day make a name. I wont disgrace you,
you will see; Ill still show.... Now good-bye for the present, he
concluded hurriedly, noticing again a strange expression in Dounias
eyes at his last words and promises. Why are you crying? Dont cry,
dont cry: we are not parting for ever! Ah, yes! Wait a minute, Id
forgotten!

He went to the table, took up a thick dusty book, opened it and took
from between the pages a little water-colour portrait on ivory. It was
the portrait of his landladys daughter, who had died of fever, that
strange girl who had wanted to be a nun. For a minute he gazed at the
delicate expressive face of his betrothed, kissed the portrait and gave
it to Dounia.

I used to talk a great deal about it to her, only to her, he said
thoughtfully. To her heart I confided much of what has since been so
hideously realised. Dont be uneasy, he returned to Dounia, she was
as much opposed to it as you, and I am glad that she is gone. The great
point is that everything now is going to be different, is going to
be broken in two, he cried, suddenly returning to his dejection.
Everything, everything, and am I prepared for it? Do I want it myself?
They say it is necessary for me to suffer! Whats the object of these
senseless sufferings? shall I know any better what they are for, when I
am crushed by hardships and idiocy, and weak as an old man after twenty
years penal servitude? And what shall I have to live for then? Why am I
consenting to that life now? Oh, I knew I was contemptible when I stood
looking at the Neva at daybreak to-day!

At last they both went out. It was hard for Dounia, but she loved him.
She walked away, but after going fifty paces she turned round to look
at him again. He was still in sight. At the corner he too turned and for
the last time their eyes met; but noticing that she was looking at him,
he motioned her away with impatience and even vexation, and turned the
corner abruptly.

I am wicked, I see that, he thought to himself, feeling ashamed a
moment later of his angry gesture to Dounia. But why are they so fond
of me if I dont deserve it? Oh, if only I were alone and no one loved
me and I too had never loved anyone! _Nothing of all this would have
happened._ But I wonder shall I in those fifteen or twenty years grow so
meek that I shall humble myself before people and whimper at every word
that I am a criminal? Yes, thats it, thats it, thats what they are
sending me there for, thats what they want. Look at them running to and
fro about the streets, every one of them a scoundrel and a criminal at
heart and, worse still, an idiot. But try to get me off and theyd be
wild with righteous indignation. Oh, how I hate them all!

He fell to musing by what process it could come to pass, that he could
be humbled before all of them, indiscriminately--humbled by conviction.
And yet why not? It must be so. Would not twenty years of continual
bondage crush him utterly? Water wears out a stone. And why, why should
he live after that? Why should he go now when he knew that it would be
so? It was the hundredth time perhaps that he had asked himself that
question since the previous evening, but still he went.



