CHAPTER V

Raskolnikov walked after him.

Whats this? cried Svidrigalov turning round, I thought I said...

It means that I am not going to lose sight of you now.

What?

Both stood still and gazed at one another, as though measuring their
strength.

From all your half tipsy stories, Raskolnikov observed harshly, I am
_positive_ that you have not given up your designs on my sister, but
are pursuing them more actively than ever. I have learnt that my sister
received a letter this morning. You have hardly been able to sit still
all this time.... You may have unearthed a wife on the way, but that
means nothing. I should like to make certain myself.

Raskolnikov could hardly have said himself what he wanted and of what he
wished to make certain.

Upon my word! Ill call the police!

Call away!

Again they stood for a minute facing each other. At last Svidrigalovs
face changed. Having satisfied himself that Raskolnikov was not
frightened at his threat, he assumed a mirthful and friendly air.

What a fellow! I purposely refrained from referring to your affair,
though I am devoured by curiosity. Its a fantastic affair. Ive put it
off till another time, but youre enough to rouse the dead.... Well, let
us go, only I warn you beforehand I am only going home for a moment,
to get some money; then I shall lock up the flat, take a cab and go to
spend the evening at the Islands. Now, now are you going to follow me?

Im coming to your lodgings, not to see you but Sofya Semyonovna, to
say Im sorry not to have been at the funeral.

Thats as you like, but Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. She has taken
the three children to an old lady of high rank, the patroness of some
orphan asylums, whom I used to know years ago. I charmed the old lady by
depositing a sum of money with her to provide for the three children of
Katerina Ivanovna and subscribing to the institution as well. I told her
too the story of Sofya Semyonovna in full detail, suppressing nothing.
It produced an indescribable effect on her. Thats why Sofya Semyonovna
has been invited to call to-day at the X. Hotel where the lady is
staying for the time.

No matter, Ill come all the same.

As you like, its nothing to me, but I wont come with you; here we are
at home. By the way, I am convinced that you regard me with suspicion
just because I have shown such delicacy and have not so far troubled
you with questions... you understand? It struck you as extraordinary; I
dont mind betting its that. Well, it teaches one to show delicacy!

And to listen at doors!

Ah, thats it, is it? laughed Svidrigalov. Yes, I should have been
surprised if you had let that pass after all that has happened. Ha-ha!
Though I did understand something of the pranks you had been up to and
were telling Sofya Semyonovna about, what was the meaning of it? Perhaps
I am quite behind the times and cant understand. For goodness sake,
explain it, my dear boy. Expound the latest theories!

You couldnt have heard anything. Youre making it all up!

But Im not talking about that (though I did hear something). No, Im
talking of the way you keep sighing and groaning now. The Schiller in
you is in revolt every moment, and now you tell me not to listen at
doors. If thats how you feel, go and inform the police that you had
this mischance: you made a little mistake in your theory. But if you are
convinced that one mustnt listen at doors, but one may murder old women
at ones pleasure, youd better be off to America and make haste. Run,
young man! There may still be time. Im speaking sincerely. Havent you
the money? Ill give you the fare.

Im not thinking of that at all, Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust.

I understand (but dont put yourself out, dont discuss it if you dont
want to). I understand the questions you are worrying over--moral ones,
arent they? Duties of citizen and man? Lay them all aside. They are
nothing to you now, ha-ha! Youll say you are still a man and a citizen.
If so you ought not to have got into this coil. Its no use taking up a
job you are not fit for. Well, youd better shoot yourself, or dont you
want to?

You seem trying to enrage me, to make me leave you.

What a queer fellow! But here we are. Welcome to the staircase. You
see, thats the way to Sofya Semyonovna. Look, there is no one at home.
Dont you believe me? Ask Kapernaumov. She leaves the key with him. Here
is Madame de Kapernaumov herself. Hey, what? She is rather deaf. Has she
gone out? Where? Did you hear? She is not in and wont be till late in
the evening probably. Well, come to my room; you wanted to come and see
me, didnt you? Here we are. Madame Resslichs not at home. She is a
woman who is always busy, an excellent woman I assure you.... She might
have been of use to you if you had been a little more sensible. Now,
see! I take this five-per-cent bond out of the bureau--see what a lot
Ive got of them still--this one will be turned into cash to-day. I
mustnt waste any more time. The bureau is locked, the flat is locked,
and here we are again on the stairs. Shall we take a cab? Im going to
the Islands. Would you like a lift? Ill take this carriage. Ah, you
refuse? You are tired of it! Come for a drive! I believe it will come on
to rain. Never mind, well put down the hood....

Svidrigalov was already in the carriage. Raskolnikov decided that his
suspicions were at least for that moment unjust. Without answering a
word he turned and walked back towards the Hay Market. If he had only
turned round on his way he might have seen Svidrigalov get out not a
hundred paces off, dismiss the cab and walk along the pavement. But he
had turned the corner and could see nothing. Intense disgust drew him
away from Svidrigalov.

To think that I could for one instant have looked for help from that
coarse brute, that depraved sensualist and blackguard! he cried.

Raskolnikovs judgment was uttered too lightly and hastily: there was
something about Svidrigalov which gave him a certain original, even a
mysterious character. As concerned his sister, Raskolnikov was convinced
that Svidrigalov would not leave her in peace. But it was too tiresome
and unbearable to go on thinking and thinking about this.

When he was alone, he had not gone twenty paces before he sank, as
usual, into deep thought. On the bridge he stood by the railing and
began gazing at the water. And his sister was standing close by him.

He met her at the entrance to the bridge, but passed by without seeing
her. Dounia had never met him like this in the street before and was
struck with dismay. She stood still and did not know whether to call
to him or not. Suddenly she saw Svidrigalov coming quickly from the
direction of the Hay Market.

He seemed to be approaching cautiously. He did not go on to the
bridge, but stood aside on the pavement, doing all he could to avoid
Raskolnikovs seeing him. He had observed Dounia for some time and had
been making signs to her. She fancied he was signalling to beg her not
to speak to her brother, but to come to him.

That was what Dounia did. She stole by her brother and went up to
Svidrigalov.

Let us make haste away, Svidrigalov whispered to her, I dont want
Rodion Romanovitch to know of our meeting. I must tell you Ive been
sitting with him in the restaurant close by, where he looked me up and
I had great difficulty in getting rid of him. He has somehow heard of
my letter to you and suspects something. It wasnt you who told him, of
course, but if not you, who then?

Well, weve turned the corner now, Dounia interrupted, and my brother
wont see us. I have to tell you that I am going no further with you.
Speak to me here. You can tell it all in the street.

In the first place, I cant say it in the street; secondly, you must
hear Sofya Semyonovna too; and, thirdly, I will show you some papers....
Oh well, if you wont agree to come with me, I shall refuse to give
any explanation and go away at once. But I beg you not to forget that
a very curious secret of your beloved brothers is entirely in my
keeping.

Dounia stood still, hesitating, and looked at Svidrigalov with
searching eyes.

What are you afraid of? he observed quietly. The town is not the
country. And even in the country you did me more harm than I did you.

Have you prepared Sofya Semyonovna?

No, I have not said a word to her and am not quite certain whether she
is at home now. But most likely she is. She has buried her stepmother
to-day: she is not likely to go visiting on such a day. For the time I
dont want to speak to anyone about it and I half regret having spoken
to you. The slightest indiscretion is as bad as betrayal in a thing like
this. I live there in that house, we are coming to it. Thats the porter
of our house--he knows me very well; you see, hes bowing; he sees Im
coming with a lady and no doubt he has noticed your face already and you
will be glad of that if you are afraid of me and suspicious. Excuse
my putting things so coarsely. I havent a flat to myself; Sofya
Semyonovnas room is next to mine--she lodges in the next flat. The
whole floor is let out in lodgings. Why are you frightened like a child?
Am I really so terrible?

Svidrigalovs lips were twisted in a condescending smile; but he was in
no smiling mood. His heart was throbbing and he could scarcely breathe.
He spoke rather loud to cover his growing excitement. But Dounia did not
notice this peculiar excitement, she was so irritated by his remark that
she was frightened of him like a child and that he was so terrible to
her.

Though I know that you are not a man... of honour, I am not in the
least afraid of you. Lead the way, she said with apparent composure,
but her face was very pale.

Svidrigalov stopped at Sonias room.

Allow me to inquire whether she is at home.... She is not. How
unfortunate! But I know she may come quite soon. If shes gone out, it
can only be to see a lady about the orphans. Their mother is dead....
Ive been meddling and making arrangements for them. If Sofya Semyonovna
does not come back in ten minutes, I will send her to you, to-day if
you like. This is my flat. These are my two rooms. Madame Resslich,
my landlady, has the next room. Now, look this way. I will show you
my chief piece of evidence: this door from my bedroom leads into two
perfectly empty rooms, which are to let. Here they are... You must look
into them with some attention.

Svidrigalov occupied two fairly large furnished rooms. Dounia was
looking about her mistrustfully, but saw nothing special in the
furniture or position of the rooms. Yet there was something to observe,
for instance, that Svidrigalovs flat was exactly between two sets of
almost uninhabited apartments. His rooms were not entered directly
from the passage, but through the landladys two almost empty rooms.
Unlocking a door leading out of his bedroom, Svidrigalov showed Dounia
the two empty rooms that were to let. Dounia stopped in the doorway, not
knowing what she was called to look upon, but Svidrigalov hastened to
explain.

Look here, at this second large room. Notice that door, its locked.
By the door stands a chair, the only one in the two rooms. I brought it
from my rooms so as to listen more conveniently. Just the other side of
the door is Sofya Semyonovnas table; she sat there talking to Rodion
Romanovitch. And I sat here listening on two successive evenings, for
two hours each time--and of course I was able to learn something, what
do you think?

You listened?

Yes, I did. Now come back to my room; we cant sit down here.

He brought Avdotya Romanovna back into his sitting-room and offered her
a chair. He sat down at the opposite side of the table, at least seven
feet from her, but probably there was the same glow in his eyes which
had once frightened Dounia so much. She shuddered and once more looked
about her distrustfully. It was an involuntary gesture; she evidently
did not wish to betray her uneasiness. But the secluded position of
Svidrigalovs lodging had suddenly struck her. She wanted to ask
whether his landlady at least were at home, but pride kept her from
asking. Moreover, she had another trouble in her heart incomparably
greater than fear for herself. She was in great distress.

Here is your letter, she said, laying it on the table. Can it be true
what you write? You hint at a crime committed, you say, by my brother.
You hint at it too clearly; you darent deny it now. I must tell you
that Id heard of this stupid story before you wrote and dont believe a
word of it. Its a disgusting and ridiculous suspicion. I know the story
and why and how it was invented. You can have no proofs. You promised to
prove it. Speak! But let me warn you that I dont believe you! I dont
believe you!

Dounia said this, speaking hurriedly, and for an instant the colour
rushed to her face.

If you didnt believe it, how could you risk coming alone to my rooms?
Why have you come? Simply from curiosity?

Dont torment me. Speak, speak!

Theres no denying that you are a brave girl. Upon my word, I thought
you would have asked Mr. Razumihin to escort you here. But he was not
with you nor anywhere near. I was on the look-out. Its spirited of
you, it proves you wanted to spare Rodion Romanovitch. But everything
is divine in you.... About your brother, what am I to say to you? Youve
just seen him yourself. What did you think of him?

Surely thats not the only thing you are building on?

No, not on that, but on his own words. He came here on two successive
evenings to see Sofya Semyonovna. Ive shown you where they sat. He made
a full confession to her. He is a murderer. He killed an old woman, a
pawnbroker, with whom he had pawned things himself. He killed her sister
too, a pedlar woman called Lizaveta, who happened to come in while he
was murdering her sister. He killed them with an axe he brought with
him. He murdered them to rob them and he did rob them. He took money and
various things.... He told all this, word for word, to Sofya Semyonovna,
the only person who knows his secret. But she has had no share by word
or deed in the murder; she was as horrified at it as you are now. Dont
be anxious, she wont betray him.

It cannot be, muttered Dounia, with white lips. She gasped for breath.
It cannot be. There was not the slightest cause, no sort of ground....
Its a lie, a lie!

He robbed her, that was the cause, he took money and things. Its true
that by his own admission he made no use of the money or things, but hid
them under a stone, where they are now. But that was because he dared
not make use of them.

But how could he steal, rob? How could he dream of it? cried Dounia,
and she jumped up from the chair. Why, you know him, and youve seen
him, can he be a thief?

She seemed to be imploring Svidrigalov; she had entirely forgotten her
fear.

There are thousands and millions of combinations and possibilities,
Avdotya Romanovna. A thief steals and knows he is a scoundrel, but Ive
heard of a gentleman who broke open the mail. Who knows, very likely he
thought he was doing a gentlemanly thing! Of course I should not have
believed it myself if Id been told of it as you have, but I believe my
own ears. He explained all the causes of it to Sofya Semyonovna too, but
she did not believe her ears at first, yet she believed her own eyes at
last.

What... were the causes?

Its a long story, Avdotya Romanovna. Heres... how shall I tell
you?--A theory of a sort, the same one by which I for instance consider
that a single misdeed is permissible if the principal aim is right, a
solitary wrongdoing and hundreds of good deeds! Its galling too, of
course, for a young man of gifts and overweening pride to know that if
he had, for instance, a paltry three thousand, his whole career, his
whole future would be differently shaped and yet not to have that three
thousand. Add to that, nervous irritability from hunger, from lodging
in a hole, from rags, from a vivid sense of the charm of his social
position and his sisters and mothers position too. Above all, vanity,
pride and vanity, though goodness knows he may have good qualities
too.... I am not blaming him, please dont think it; besides, its not
my business. A special little theory came in too--a theory of a
sort--dividing mankind, you see, into material and superior persons,
that is persons to whom the law does not apply owing to their
superiority, who make laws for the rest of mankind, the material, that
is. Its all right as a theory, _une thorie comme une autre_. Napoleon
attracted him tremendously, that is, what affected him was that a
great many men of genius have not hesitated at wrongdoing, but have
overstepped the law without thinking about it. He seems to have fancied
that he was a genius too--that is, he was convinced of it for a time. He
has suffered a great deal and is still suffering from the idea that he
could make a theory, but was incapable of boldly overstepping the law,
and so he is not a man of genius. And thats humiliating for a young man
of any pride, in our day especially....

But remorse? You deny him any moral feeling then? Is he like that?

Ah, Avdotya Romanovna, everything is in a muddle now; not that it was
ever in very good order. Russians in general are broad in their ideas,
Avdotya Romanovna, broad like their land and exceedingly disposed to
the fantastic, the chaotic. But its a misfortune to be broad without
a special genius. Do you remember what a lot of talk we had together on
this subject, sitting in the evenings on the terrace after supper? Why,
you used to reproach me with breadth! Who knows, perhaps we were talking
at the very time when he was lying here thinking over his plan. There
are no sacred traditions amongst us, especially in the educated class,
Avdotya Romanovna. At the best someone will make them up somehow for
himself out of books or from some old chronicle. But those are for the
most part the learned and all old fogeys, so that it would be almost
ill-bred in a man of society. You know my opinions in general, though. I
never blame anyone. I do nothing at all, I persevere in that. But
weve talked of this more than once before. I was so happy indeed as to
interest you in my opinions.... You are very pale, Avdotya Romanovna.

I know his theory. I read that article of his about men to whom all is
permitted. Razumihin brought it to me.

Mr. Razumihin? Your brothers article? In a magazine? Is there such an
article? I didnt know. It must be interesting. But where are you going,
Avdotya Romanovna?

I want to see Sofya Semyonovna, Dounia articulated faintly. How do I
go to her? She has come in, perhaps. I must see her at once. Perhaps
she...

Avdotya Romanovna could not finish. Her breath literally failed her.

Sofya Semyonovna will not be back till night, at least I believe not.
She was to have been back at once, but if not, then she will not be in
till quite late.

Ah, then you are lying! I see... you were lying... lying all the
time.... I dont believe you! I dont believe you! cried Dounia,
completely losing her head.

Almost fainting, she sank on to a chair which Svidrigalov made haste to
give her.

Avdotya Romanovna, what is it? Control yourself! Here is some water.
Drink a little....

He sprinkled some water over her. Dounia shuddered and came to herself.

It has acted violently, Svidrigalov muttered to himself, frowning.
Avdotya Romanovna, calm yourself! Believe me, he has friends. We will
save him. Would you like me to take him abroad? I have money, I can get
a ticket in three days. And as for the murder, he will do all sorts of
good deeds yet, to atone for it. Calm yourself. He may become a great
man yet. Well, how are you? How do you feel?

Cruel man! To be able to jeer at it! Let me go...

Where are you going?

To him. Where is he? Do you know? Why is this door locked? We came in
at that door and now it is locked. When did you manage to lock it?

We couldnt be shouting all over the flat on such a subject. I am far
from jeering; its simply that Im sick of talking like this. But how
can you go in such a state? Do you want to betray him? You will drive
him to fury, and he will give himself up. Let me tell you, he is already
being watched; they are already on his track. You will simply be giving
him away. Wait a little: I saw him and was talking to him just now. He
can still be saved. Wait a bit, sit down; let us think it over together.
I asked you to come in order to discuss it alone with you and to
consider it thoroughly. But do sit down!

How can you save him? Can he really be saved?

Dounia sat down. Svidrigalov sat down beside her.

It all depends on you, on you, on you alone, he began with glowing
eyes, almost in a whisper and hardly able to utter the words for
emotion.

Dounia drew back from him in alarm. He too was trembling all over.

You... one word from you, and he is saved. I... Ill save him. I have
money and friends. Ill send him away at once. Ill get a passport,
two passports, one for him and one for me. I have friends... capable
people.... If you like, Ill take a passport for you... for your
mother.... What do you want with Razumihin? I love you too.... I love
you beyond everything.... Let me kiss the hem of your dress, let me, let
me.... The very rustle of it is too much for me. Tell me, do that,
and Ill do it. Ill do everything. I will do the impossible. What you
believe, I will believe. Ill do anything--anything! Dont, dont look
at me like that. Do you know that you are killing me?...

He was almost beginning to rave.... Something seemed suddenly to go to
his head. Dounia jumped up and rushed to the door.

Open it! Open it! she called, shaking the door. Open it! Is there no
one there?

Svidrigalov got up and came to himself. His still trembling lips slowly
broke into an angry mocking smile.

There is no one at home, he said quietly and emphatically. The
landlady has gone out, and its waste of time to shout like that. You
are only exciting yourself uselessly.

Where is the key? Open the door at once, at once, base man!

I have lost the key and cannot find it.

This is an outrage, cried Dounia, turning pale as death. She rushed
to the furthest corner, where she made haste to barricade herself with a
little table.

She did not scream, but she fixed her eyes on her tormentor and watched
every movement he made.

Svidrigalov remained standing at the other end of the room facing her.
He was positively composed, at least in appearance, but his face was
pale as before. The mocking smile did not leave his face.

You spoke of outrage just now, Avdotya Romanovna. In that case you
may be sure Ive taken measures. Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. The
Kapernaumovs are far away--there are five locked rooms between. I am at
least twice as strong as you are and I have nothing to fear, besides.
For you could not complain afterwards. You surely would not be willing
actually to betray your brother? Besides, no one would believe you. How
should a girl have come alone to visit a solitary man in his lodgings?
So that even if you do sacrifice your brother, you could prove nothing.
It is very difficult to prove an assault, Avdotya Romanovna.

Scoundrel! whispered Dounia indignantly.

As you like, but observe I was only speaking by way of a general
proposition. Its my personal conviction that you are perfectly
right--violence is hateful. I only spoke to show you that you need have
no remorse even if... you were willing to save your brother of your
own accord, as I suggest to you. You would be simply submitting to
circumstances, to violence, in fact, if we must use that word. Think
about it. Your brothers and your mothers fate are in your hands. I
will be your slave... all my life... I will wait here.

Svidrigalov sat down on the sofa about eight steps from Dounia. She had
not the slightest doubt now of his unbending determination. Besides, she
knew him. Suddenly she pulled out of her pocket a revolver, cocked it
and laid it in her hand on the table. Svidrigalov jumped up.

Aha! So thats it, is it? he cried, surprised but smiling maliciously.
Well, that completely alters the aspect of affairs. Youve made things
wonderfully easier for me, Avdotya Romanovna. But where did you get the
revolver? Was it Mr. Razumihin? Why, its my revolver, an old friend!
And how Ive hunted for it! The shooting lessons Ive given you in the
country have not been thrown away.

Its not your revolver, it belonged to Marfa Petrovna, whom you killed,
wretch! There was nothing of yours in her house. I took it when I began
to suspect what you were capable of. If you dare to advance one step, I
swear Ill kill you. She was frantic.

But your brother? I ask from curiosity, said Svidrigalov, still
standing where he was.

Inform, if you want to! Dont stir! Dont come nearer! Ill shoot! You
poisoned your wife, I know; you are a murderer yourself! She held the
revolver ready.

Are you so positive I poisoned Marfa Petrovna?

You did! You hinted it yourself; you talked to me of poison.... I know
you went to get it... you had it in readiness.... It was your doing....
It must have been your doing.... Scoundrel!

Even if that were true, it would have been for your sake... you would
have been the cause.

You are lying! I hated you always, always....

Oho, Avdotya Romanovna! You seem to have forgotten how you softened
to me in the heat of propaganda. I saw it in your eyes. Do you remember
that moonlight night, when the nightingale was singing?

Thats a lie, there was a flash of fury in Dounias eyes, thats a
lie and a libel!

A lie? Well, if you like, its a lie. I made it up. Women ought not
to be reminded of such things, he smiled. I know you will shoot, you
pretty wild creature. Well, shoot away!

Dounia raised the revolver, and deadly pale, gazed at him, measuring the
distance and awaiting the first movement on his part. Her lower lip was
white and quivering and her big black eyes flashed like fire. He had
never seen her so handsome. The fire glowing in her eyes at the moment
she raised the revolver seemed to kindle him and there was a pang of
anguish in his heart. He took a step forward and a shot rang out. The
bullet grazed his hair and flew into the wall behind. He stood still and
laughed softly.

The wasp has stung me. She aimed straight at my head. Whats this?
Blood? he pulled out his handkerchief to wipe the blood, which flowed
in a thin stream down his right temple. The bullet seemed to have just
grazed the skin.

Dounia lowered the revolver and looked at Svidrigalov not so much in
terror as in a sort of wild amazement. She seemed not to understand what
she was doing and what was going on.

Well, you missed! Fire again, Ill wait, said Svidrigalov softly,
still smiling, but gloomily. If you go on like that, I shall have time
to seize you before you cock again.

Dounia started, quickly cocked the pistol and again raised it.

Let me be, she cried in despair. I swear Ill shoot again. I... Ill
kill you.

Well... at three paces you can hardly help it. But if you dont...
then. His eyes flashed and he took two steps forward. Dounia shot
again: it missed fire.

You havent loaded it properly. Never mind, you have another charge
there. Get it ready, Ill wait.

He stood facing her, two paces away, waiting and gazing at her with wild
determination, with feverishly passionate, stubborn, set eyes. Dounia
saw that he would sooner die than let her go. And... now, of course she
would kill him, at two paces! Suddenly she flung away the revolver.

Shes dropped it! said Svidrigalov with surprise, and he drew a deep
breath. A weight seemed to have rolled from his heart--perhaps not only
the fear of death; indeed he may scarcely have felt it at that moment.
It was the deliverance from another feeling, darker and more bitter,
which he could not himself have defined.

He went to Dounia and gently put his arm round her waist. She did not
resist, but, trembling like a leaf, looked at him with suppliant eyes.
He tried to say something, but his lips moved without being able to
utter a sound.

Let me go, Dounia implored. Svidrigalov shuddered. Her voice now was
quite different.

Then you dont love me? he asked softly. Dounia shook her head.

And... and you cant? Never? he whispered in despair.

Never!

There followed a moment of terrible, dumb struggle in the heart of
Svidrigalov. He looked at her with an indescribable gaze. Suddenly
he withdrew his arm, turned quickly to the window and stood facing it.
Another moment passed.

Heres the key.

He took it out of the left pocket of his coat and laid it on the table
behind him, without turning or looking at Dounia.

Take it! Make haste!

He looked stubbornly out of the window. Dounia went up to the table to
take the key.

Make haste! Make haste! repeated Svidrigalov, still without turning
or moving. But there seemed a terrible significance in the tone of that
make haste.

Dounia understood it, snatched up the key, flew to the door, unlocked it
quickly and rushed out of the room. A minute later, beside herself, she
ran out on to the canal bank in the direction of X. Bridge.

Svidrigalov remained three minutes standing at the window. At last he
slowly turned, looked about him and passed his hand over his forehead. A
strange smile contorted his face, a pitiful, sad, weak smile, a smile of
despair. The blood, which was already getting dry, smeared his hand.
He looked angrily at it, then wetted a towel and washed his temple.
The revolver which Dounia had flung away lay near the door and suddenly
caught his eye. He picked it up and examined it. It was a little pocket
three-barrel revolver of old-fashioned construction. There were still
two charges and one capsule left in it. It could be fired again. He
thought a little, put the revolver in his pocket, took his hat and went
out.



