CHAPTER IV

Raskolnikov went straight to the house on the canal bank where Sonia
lived. It was an old green house of three storeys. He found the
porter and obtained from him vague directions as to the whereabouts of
Kapernaumov, the tailor. Having found in the corner of the courtyard
the entrance to the dark and narrow staircase, he mounted to the second
floor and came out into a gallery that ran round the whole second storey
over the yard. While he was wandering in the darkness, uncertain where
to turn for Kapernaumovs door, a door opened three paces from him; he
mechanically took hold of it.

Who is there? a womans voice asked uneasily.

Its I... come to see you, answered Raskolnikov and he walked into the
tiny entry.

On a broken chair stood a candle in a battered copper candlestick.

Its you! Good heavens! cried Sonia weakly, and she stood rooted to
the spot.

Which is your room? This way? and Raskolnikov, trying not to look at
her, hastened in.

A minute later Sonia, too, came in with the candle, set down the
candlestick and, completely disconcerted, stood before him inexpressibly
agitated and apparently frightened by his unexpected visit. The colour
rushed suddenly to her pale face and tears came into her eyes... She
felt sick and ashamed and happy, too.... Raskolnikov turned away quickly
and sat on a chair by the table. He scanned the room in a rapid glance.

It was a large but exceedingly low-pitched room, the only one let by the
Kapernaumovs, to whose rooms a closed door led in the wall on the left.
In the opposite side on the right hand wall was another door, always
kept locked. That led to the next flat, which formed a separate lodging.
Sonias room looked like a barn; it was a very irregular quadrangle and
this gave it a grotesque appearance. A wall with three windows looking
out on to the canal ran aslant so that one corner formed a very acute
angle, and it was difficult to see in it without very strong light.
The other corner was disproportionately obtuse. There was scarcely any
furniture in the big room: in the corner on the right was a bedstead,
beside it, nearest the door, a chair. A plain, deal table covered by a
blue cloth stood against the same wall, close to the door into the other
flat. Two rush-bottom chairs stood by the table. On the opposite
wall near the acute angle stood a small plain wooden chest of drawers
looking, as it were, lost in a desert. That was all there was in the
room. The yellow, scratched and shabby wall-paper was black in the
corners. It must have been damp and full of fumes in the winter. There
was every sign of poverty; even the bedstead had no curtain.

Sonia looked in silence at her visitor, who was so attentively and
unceremoniously scrutinising her room, and even began at last to tremble
with terror, as though she was standing before her judge and the arbiter
of her destinies.

I am late.... Its eleven, isnt it? he asked, still not lifting his
eyes.

Yes, muttered Sonia, oh yes, it is, she added, hastily, as though in
that lay her means of escape. My landladys clock has just struck... I
heard it myself....

Ive come to you for the last time, Raskolnikov went on gloomily,
although this was the first time. I may perhaps not see you again...

Are you... going away?

I dont know... to-morrow....

Then you are not coming to Katerina Ivanovna to-morrow? Sonias voice
shook.

I dont know. I shall know to-morrow morning.... Never mind that: Ive
come to say one word....

He raised his brooding eyes to her and suddenly noticed that he was
sitting down while she was all the while standing before him.

Why are you standing? Sit down, he said in a changed voice, gentle and
friendly.

She sat down. He looked kindly and almost compassionately at her.

How thin you are! What a hand! Quite transparent, like a dead hand.

He took her hand. Sonia smiled faintly.

I have always been like that, she said.

Even when you lived at home?

Yes.

Of course, you were, he added abruptly and the expression of his face
and the sound of his voice changed again suddenly.

He looked round him once more.

You rent this room from the Kapernaumovs?

Yes....

They live there, through that door?

Yes.... They have another room like this.

All in one room?

Yes.

I should be afraid in your room at night, he observed gloomily.

They are very good people, very kind, answered Sonia, who still seemed
bewildered, and all the furniture, everything... everything is theirs.
And they are very kind and the children, too, often come to see me.

They all stammer, dont they?

Yes.... He stammers and hes lame. And his wife, too.... Its not
exactly that she stammers, but she cant speak plainly. She is a very
kind woman. And he used to be a house serf. And there are seven
children... and its only the eldest one that stammers and the others
are simply ill... but they dont stammer.... But where did you hear
about them? she added with some surprise.

Your father told me, then. He told me all about you.... And how you
went out at six oclock and came back at nine and how Katerina Ivanovna
knelt down by your bed.

Sonia was confused.

I fancied I saw him to-day, she whispered hesitatingly.

Whom?

Father. I was walking in the street, out there at the corner, about ten
oclock and he seemed to be walking in front. It looked just like him. I
wanted to go to Katerina Ivanovna....

You were walking in the streets?

Yes, Sonia whispered abruptly, again overcome with confusion and
looking down.

Katerina Ivanovna used to beat you, I dare say?

Oh no, what are you saying? No! Sonia looked at him almost with
dismay.

You love her, then?

Love her? Of course! said Sonia with plaintive emphasis, and she
clasped her hands in distress. Ah, you dont.... If you only knew!
You see, she is quite like a child.... Her mind is quite unhinged, you
see... from sorrow. And how clever she used to be... how generous... how
kind! Ah, you dont understand, you dont understand!

Sonia said this as though in despair, wringing her hands in excitement
and distress. Her pale cheeks flushed, there was a look of anguish in
her eyes. It was clear that she was stirred to the very depths, that
she was longing to speak, to champion, to express something. A sort
of _insatiable_ compassion, if one may so express it, was reflected in
every feature of her face.

Beat me! how can you? Good heavens, beat me! And if she did beat me,
what then? What of it? You know nothing, nothing about it.... She is so
unhappy... ah, how unhappy! And ill.... She is seeking righteousness,
she is pure. She has such faith that there must be righteousness
everywhere and she expects it.... And if you were to torture her, she
wouldnt do wrong. She doesnt see that its impossible for people to
be righteous and she is angry at it. Like a child, like a child. She is
good!

And what will happen to you?

Sonia looked at him inquiringly.

They are left on your hands, you see. They were all on your hands
before, though.... And your father came to you to beg for drink. Well,
how will it be now?

I dont know, Sonia articulated mournfully.

Will they stay there?

I dont know.... They are in debt for the lodging, but the landlady,
I hear, said to-day that she wanted to get rid of them, and Katerina
Ivanovna says that she wont stay another minute.

How is it she is so bold? She relies upon you?

Oh, no, dont talk like that.... We are one, we live like one. Sonia
was agitated again and even angry, as though a canary or some other
little bird were to be angry. And what could she do? What, what could
she do? she persisted, getting hot and excited. And how she cried
to-day! Her mind is unhinged, havent you noticed it? At one minute she
is worrying like a child that everything should be right to-morrow, the
lunch and all that.... Then she is wringing her hands, spitting blood,
weeping, and all at once she will begin knocking her head against the
wall, in despair. Then she will be comforted again. She builds all her
hopes on you; she says that you will help her now and that she will
borrow a little money somewhere and go to her native town with me and
set up a boarding school for the daughters of gentlemen and take me to
superintend it, and we will begin a new splendid life. And she kisses
and hugs me, comforts me, and you know she has such faith, such faith in
her fancies! One cant contradict her. And all the day long she has been
washing, cleaning, mending. She dragged the wash tub into the room with
her feeble hands and sank on the bed, gasping for breath. We went this
morning to the shops to buy shoes for Polenka and Lida for theirs are
quite worn out. Only the money wed reckoned wasnt enough, not nearly
enough. And she picked out such dear little boots, for she has taste,
you dont know. And there in the shop she burst out crying before the
shopmen because she hadnt enough.... Ah, it was sad to see her....

Well, after that I can understand your living like this, Raskolnikov
said with a bitter smile.

And arent you sorry for them? Arent you sorry? Sonia flew at him
again. Why, I know, you gave your last penny yourself, though youd
seen nothing of it, and if youd seen everything, oh dear! And how
often, how often Ive brought her to tears! Only last week! Yes, I! Only
a week before his death. I was cruel! And how often Ive done it! Ah,
Ive been wretched at the thought of it all day!

Sonia wrung her hands as she spoke at the pain of remembering it.

You were cruel?

Yes, I--I. I went to see them, she went on, weeping, and father said,
read me something, Sonia, my head aches, read to me, heres a book. He
had a book he had got from Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, he lives
there, he always used to get hold of such funny books. And I said, I
cant stay, as I didnt want to read, and Id gone in chiefly to show
Katerina Ivanovna some collars. Lizaveta, the pedlar, sold me some
collars and cuffs cheap, pretty, new, embroidered ones. Katerina
Ivanovna liked them very much; she put them on and looked at herself
in the glass and was delighted with them. Make me a present of them,
Sonia, she said, please do. _Please do_, she said, she wanted them
so much. And when could she wear them? They just reminded her of her old
happy days. She looked at herself in the glass, admired herself, and she
has no clothes at all, no things of her own, hasnt had all these years!
And she never asks anyone for anything; she is proud, shed sooner give
away everything. And these she asked for, she liked them so much. And I
was sorry to give them. What use are they to you, Katerina Ivanovna? I
said. I spoke like that to her, I ought not to have said that! She gave
me such a look. And she was so grieved, so grieved at my refusing her.
And it was so sad to see.... And she was not grieved for the collars,
but for my refusing, I saw that. Ah, if only I could bring it all back,
change it, take back those words! Ah, if I... but its nothing to you!

Did you know Lizaveta, the pedlar?

Yes.... Did you know her? Sonia asked with some surprise.

Katerina Ivanovna is in consumption, rapid consumption; she will soon
die, said Raskolnikov after a pause, without answering her question.

Oh, no, no, no!

And Sonia unconsciously clutched both his hands, as though imploring
that she should not.

But it will be better if she does die.

No, not better, not at all better! Sonia unconsciously repeated in
dismay.

And the children? What can you do except take them to live with you?

Oh, I dont know, cried Sonia, almost in despair, and she put her
hands to her head.

It was evident that that idea had very often occurred to her before and
he had only roused it again.

And, what, if even now, while Katerina Ivanovna is alive, you get ill
and are taken to the hospital, what will happen then? he persisted
pitilessly.

How can you? That cannot be!

And Sonias face worked with awful terror.

Cannot be? Raskolnikov went on with a harsh smile. You are not
insured against it, are you? What will happen to them then? They will
be in the street, all of them, she will cough and beg and knock her head
against some wall, as she did to-day, and the children will cry....
Then she will fall down, be taken to the police station and to the
hospital, she will die, and the children...

Oh, no.... God will not let it be! broke at last from Sonias
overburdened bosom.

She listened, looking imploringly at him, clasping her hands in dumb
entreaty, as though it all depended upon him.

Raskolnikov got up and began to walk about the room. A minute passed.
Sonia was standing with her hands and her head hanging in terrible
dejection.

And cant you save? Put by for a rainy day? he asked, stopping
suddenly before her.

No, whispered Sonia.

Of course not. Have you tried? he added almost ironically.

Yes.

And it didnt come off! Of course not! No need to ask.

And again he paced the room. Another minute passed.

You dont get money every day?

Sonia was more confused than ever and colour rushed into her face again.

No, she whispered with a painful effort.

It will be the same with Polenka, no doubt, he said suddenly.

No, no! It cant be, no! Sonia cried aloud in desperation, as though
she had been stabbed. God would not allow anything so awful!

He lets others come to it.

No, no! God will protect her, God! she repeated beside herself.

But, perhaps, there is no God at all, Raskolnikov answered with a sort
of malignance, laughed and looked at her.

Sonias face suddenly changed; a tremor passed over it. She looked at
him with unutterable reproach, tried to say something, but could not
speak and broke into bitter, bitter sobs, hiding her face in her hands.

You say Katerina Ivanovnas mind is unhinged; your own mind is
unhinged, he said after a brief silence.

Five minutes passed. He still paced up and down the room in silence, not
looking at her. At last he went up to her; his eyes glittered. He put
his two hands on her shoulders and looked straight into her tearful
face. His eyes were hard, feverish and piercing, his lips were
twitching. All at once he bent down quickly and dropping to the
ground, kissed her foot. Sonia drew back from him as from a madman. And
certainly he looked like a madman.

What are you doing to me? she muttered, turning pale, and a sudden
anguish clutched at her heart.

He stood up at once.

I did not bow down to you, I bowed down to all the suffering of
humanity, he said wildly and walked away to the window. Listen, he
added, turning to her a minute later. I said just now to an insolent
man that he was not worth your little finger... and that I did my sister
honour making her sit beside you.

Ach, you said that to them! And in her presence? cried Sonia,
frightened. Sit down with me! An honour! Why, Im... dishonourable....
Ah, why did you say that?

It was not because of your dishonour and your sin I said that of you,
but because of your great suffering. But you are a great sinner, thats
true, he added almost solemnly, and your worst sin is that you have
destroyed and betrayed yourself _for nothing_. Isnt that fearful? Isnt
it fearful that you are living in this filth which you loathe so, and at
the same time you know yourself (youve only to open your eyes) that you
are not helping anyone by it, not saving anyone from anything? Tell me,
 he went on almost in a frenzy, how this shame and degradation can exist
in you side by side with other, opposite, holy feelings? It would be
better, a thousand times better and wiser to leap into the water and end
it all!

But what would become of them? Sonia asked faintly, gazing at him with
eyes of anguish, but not seeming surprised at his suggestion.

Raskolnikov looked strangely at her. He read it all in her face; so she
must have had that thought already, perhaps many times, and earnestly
she had thought out in her despair how to end it and so earnestly, that
now she scarcely wondered at his suggestion. She had not even noticed
the cruelty of his words. (The significance of his reproaches and his
peculiar attitude to her shame she had, of course, not noticed either,
and that, too, was clear to him.) But he saw how monstrously the thought
of her disgraceful, shameful position was torturing her and had long
tortured her. What, what, he thought, could hitherto have hindered
her from putting an end to it? Only then he realised what those poor
little orphan children and that pitiful half-crazy Katerina Ivanovna,
knocking her head against the wall in her consumption, meant for Sonia.

But, nevertheless, it was clear to him again that with her character and
the amount of education she had after all received, she could not in any
case remain so. He was still confronted by the question, how could she
have remained so long in that position without going out of her mind,
since she could not bring herself to jump into the water? Of course he
knew that Sonias position was an exceptional case, though unhappily not
unique and not infrequent, indeed; but that very exceptionalness, her
tinge of education, her previous life might, one would have thought,
have killed her at the first step on that revolting path. What held her
up--surely not depravity? All that infamy had obviously only touched
her mechanically, not one drop of real depravity had penetrated to her
heart; he saw that. He saw through her as she stood before him....

There are three ways before her, he thought, the canal, the madhouse,
or... at last to sink into depravity which obscures the mind and turns
the heart to stone.

The last idea was the most revolting, but he was a sceptic, he was
young, abstract, and therefore cruel, and so he could not help believing
that the last end was the most likely.

But can that be true? he cried to himself. Can that creature who has
still preserved the purity of her spirit be consciously drawn at last
into that sink of filth and iniquity? Can the process already have
begun? Can it be that she has only been able to bear it till now,
because vice has begun to be less loathsome to her? No, no, that cannot
be! he cried, as Sonia had just before. No, what has kept her from the
canal till now is the idea of sin and they, the children.... And if she
has not gone out of her mind... but who says she has not gone out of her
mind? Is she in her senses? Can one talk, can one reason as she does?
How can she sit on the edge of the abyss of loathsomeness into which she
is slipping and refuse to listen when she is told of danger? Does she
expect a miracle? No doubt she does. Doesnt that all mean madness?

He stayed obstinately at that thought. He liked that explanation indeed
better than any other. He began looking more intently at her.

So you pray to God a great deal, Sonia? he asked her.

Sonia did not speak; he stood beside her waiting for an answer.

What should I be without God? she whispered rapidly, forcibly,
glancing at him with suddenly flashing eyes, and squeezing his hand.

Ah, so that is it! he thought.

And what does God do for you? he asked, probing her further.

Sonia was silent a long while, as though she could not answer. Her weak
chest kept heaving with emotion.

Be silent! Dont ask! You dont deserve! she cried suddenly, looking
sternly and wrathfully at him.

Thats it, thats it, he repeated to himself.

He does everything, she whispered quickly, looking down again.

Thats the way out! Thats the explanation, he decided, scrutinising
her with eager curiosity, with a new, strange, almost morbid feeling.
He gazed at that pale, thin, irregular, angular little face, those soft
blue eyes, which could flash with such fire, such stern energy, that
little body still shaking with indignation and anger--and it all seemed
to him more and more strange, almost impossible. She is a religious
maniac! he repeated to himself.

There was a book lying on the chest of drawers. He had noticed it every
time he paced up and down the room. Now he took it up and looked at it.
It was the New Testament in the Russian translation. It was bound in
leather, old and worn.

Where did you get that? he called to her across the room.

She was still standing in the same place, three steps from the table.

It was brought me, she answered, as it were unwillingly, not looking
at him.

Who brought it?

Lizaveta, I asked her for it.

Lizaveta! strange! he thought.

Everything about Sonia seemed to him stranger and more wonderful every
moment. He carried the book to the candle and began to turn over the
pages.

Where is the story of Lazarus? he asked suddenly.

Sonia looked obstinately at the ground and would not answer. She was
standing sideways to the table.

Where is the raising of Lazarus? Find it for me, Sonia.

She stole a glance at him.

You are not looking in the right place.... Its in the fourth gospel,
 she whispered sternly, without looking at him.

Find it and read it to me, he said. He sat down with his elbow on the
table, leaned his head on his hand and looked away sullenly, prepared to
listen.

In three weeks time theyll welcome me in the madhouse! I shall be
there if I am not in a worse place, he muttered to himself.

Sonia heard Raskolnikovs request distrustfully and moved hesitatingly
to the table. She took the book however.

Havent you read it? she asked, looking up at him across the table.

Her voice became sterner and sterner.

Long ago.... When I was at school. Read!

And havent you heard it in church?

I... havent been. Do you often go?

N-no, whispered Sonia.

Raskolnikov smiled.

I understand.... And you wont go to your fathers funeral to-morrow?

Yes, I shall. I was at church last week, too... I had a requiem
service.

For whom?

For Lizaveta. She was killed with an axe.

His nerves were more and more strained. His head began to go round.

Were you friends with Lizaveta?

Yes.... She was good... she used to come... not often... she
couldnt.... We used to read together and... talk. She will see God.

The last phrase sounded strange in his ears. And here was something new
again: the mysterious meetings with Lizaveta and both of them--religious
maniacs.

I shall be a religious maniac myself soon! Its infectious!

Read! he cried irritably and insistently.

Sonia still hesitated. Her heart was throbbing. She hardly dared to read
to him. He looked almost with exasperation at the unhappy lunatic.

What for? You dont believe?... she whispered softly and as it were
breathlessly.

Read! I want you to, he persisted. You used to read to Lizaveta.

Sonia opened the book and found the place. Her hands were shaking, her
voice failed her. Twice she tried to begin and could not bring out the
first syllable.

Now a certain man was sick named Lazarus of Bethany... she forced
herself at last to read, but at the third word her voice broke like an
overstrained string. There was a catch in her breath.

Raskolnikov saw in part why Sonia could not bring herself to read to him
and the more he saw this, the more roughly and irritably he insisted on
her doing so. He understood only too well how painful it was for her
to betray and unveil all that was her _own_. He understood that these
feelings really were her _secret treasure_, which she had kept perhaps
for years, perhaps from childhood, while she lived with an unhappy
father and a distracted stepmother crazed by grief, in the midst of
starving children and unseemly abuse and reproaches. But at the same
time he knew now and knew for certain that, although it filled her with
dread and suffering, yet she had a tormenting desire to read and to read
to _him_ that he might hear it, and to read _now_ whatever might come of
it!... He read this in her eyes, he could see it in her intense emotion.
She mastered herself, controlled the spasm in her throat and went on
reading the eleventh chapter of St. John. She went on to the nineteenth
verse:

And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them concerning
their brother.

Then Martha as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming went and met
Him: but Mary sat still in the house.

Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my brother
had not died.

But I know that even now whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God, God will give
it Thee....

Then she stopped again with a shamefaced feeling that her voice would
quiver and break again.

Jesus said unto her, thy brother shall rise again.

Martha saith unto Him, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection, at the last day.

Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believeth in Me though he were dead, yet shall he live.

And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. Believest
thou this?

She saith unto Him,

(And drawing a painful breath, Sonia read distinctly and forcibly as
though she were making a public confession of faith.)

Yea, Lord: I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God Which
should come into the world.

She stopped and looked up quickly at him, but controlling herself went
on reading. Raskolnikov sat without moving, his elbows on the table and
his eyes turned away. She read to the thirty-second verse.

Then when Mary was come where Jesus was and saw Him, she fell down at
His feet, saying unto Him, Lord if Thou hadst been here, my brother had
not died.

When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which
came with her, He groaned in the spirit and was troubled,

And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto Him, Lord, come and
see.

Jesus wept.

Then said the Jews, behold how He loved him!

And some of them said, could not this Man which opened the eyes of the
blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?

Raskolnikov turned and looked at her with emotion. Yes, he had known it!
She was trembling in a real physical fever. He had expected it. She was
getting near the story of the greatest miracle and a feeling of immense
triumph came over her. Her voice rang out like a bell; triumph and joy
gave it power. The lines danced before her eyes, but she knew what she
was reading by heart. At the last verse Could not this Man which opened
the eyes of the blind... dropping her voice she passionately reproduced
the doubt, the reproach and censure of the blind disbelieving Jews, who
in another moment would fall at His feet as though struck by
thunder, sobbing and believing.... And _he, he_--too, is blinded and
unbelieving, he, too, will hear, he, too, will believe, yes, yes! At
once, now, was what she was dreaming, and she was quivering with happy
anticipation.

Jesus therefore again groaning in Himself cometh to the grave. It was a
cave, and a stone lay upon it.

Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was
dead, saith unto Him, Lord by this time he stinketh: for he hath been
dead four days.

She laid emphasis on the word _four_.

Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldest
believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?

Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.
And Jesus lifted up His eyes and said, Father, I thank Thee that Thou
hast heard Me.

And I knew that Thou hearest Me always; but because of the people which
stand by I said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me.

And when He thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come
forth.

And he that was dead came forth.

(She read loudly, cold and trembling with ecstasy, as though she were
seeing it before her eyes.)

Bound hand and foot with graveclothes; and his face was bound about
with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him and let him go.

Then many of the Jews which came to Mary and had seen the things which
Jesus did believed on Him.

She could read no more, closed the book and got up from her chair
quickly.

That is all about the raising of Lazarus, she whispered severely and
abruptly, and turning away she stood motionless, not daring to raise
her eyes to him. She still trembled feverishly. The candle-end was
flickering out in the battered candlestick, dimly lighting up in the
poverty-stricken room the murderer and the harlot who had so strangely
been reading together the eternal book. Five minutes or more passed.

I came to speak of something, Raskolnikov said aloud, frowning. He got
up and went to Sonia. She lifted her eyes to him in silence. His face
was particularly stern and there was a sort of savage determination in
it.

I have abandoned my family to-day, he said, my mother and sister. I
am not going to see them. Ive broken with them completely.

What for? asked Sonia amazed. Her recent meeting with his mother and
sister had left a great impression which she could not analyse. She
heard his news almost with horror.

I have only you now, he added. Let us go together.... Ive come to
you, we are both accursed, let us go our way together!

His eyes glittered as though he were mad, Sonia thought, in her turn.

Go where? she asked in alarm and she involuntarily stepped back.

How do I know? I only know its the same road, I know that and nothing
more. Its the same goal!

She looked at him and understood nothing. She knew only that he was
terribly, infinitely unhappy.

No one of them will understand, if you tell them, but I have
understood. I need you, that is why I have come to you.

I dont understand, whispered Sonia.

Youll understand later. Havent you done the same? You, too, have
transgressed... have had the strength to transgress. You have laid
hands on yourself, you have destroyed a life... _your own_ (its all the
same!). You might have lived in spirit and understanding, but youll
end in the Hay Market.... But you wont be able to stand it, and if
you remain alone youll go out of your mind like me. You are like a mad
creature already. So we must go together on the same road! Let us go!

What for? Whats all this for? said Sonia, strangely and violently
agitated by his words.

What for? Because you cant remain like this, thats why! You must look
things straight in the face at last, and not weep like a child and cry
that God wont allow it. What will happen, if you should really be taken
to the hospital to-morrow? She is mad and in consumption, shell soon
die and the children? Do you mean to tell me Polenka wont come to
grief? Havent you seen children here at the street corners sent out
by their mothers to beg? Ive found out where those mothers live and in
what surroundings. Children cant remain children there! At seven the
child is vicious and a thief. Yet children, you know, are the image of
Christ: theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. He bade us honour and love
them, they are the humanity of the future....

Whats to be done, whats to be done? repeated Sonia, weeping
hysterically and wringing her hands.

Whats to be done? Break what must be broken, once for all, thats all,
and take the suffering on oneself. What, you dont understand? Youll
understand later.... Freedom and power, and above all, power! Over all
trembling creation and all the ant-heap!... Thats the goal, remember
that! Thats my farewell message. Perhaps its the last time I shall
speak to you. If I dont come to-morrow, youll hear of it all, and then
remember these words. And some day later on, in years to come, youll
understand perhaps what they meant. If I come to-morrow, Ill tell you
who killed Lizaveta.... Good-bye.

Sonia started with terror.

Why, do you know who killed her? she asked, chilled with horror,
looking wildly at him.

I know and will tell... you, only you. I have chosen you out. Im not
coming to you to ask forgiveness, but simply to tell you. I chose you
out long ago to hear this, when your father talked of you and when
Lizaveta was alive, I thought of it. Good-bye, dont shake hands.
To-morrow!

He went out. Sonia gazed at him as at a madman. But she herself was like
one insane and felt it. Her head was going round.

Good heavens, how does he know who killed Lizaveta? What did those
words mean? Its awful! But at the same time _the idea_ did not enter
her head, not for a moment! Oh, he must be terribly unhappy!... He has
abandoned his mother and sister.... What for? What has happened? And
what had he in his mind? What did he say to her? He had kissed her foot
and said... said (yes, he had said it clearly) that he could not live
without her.... Oh, merciful heavens!

Sonia spent the whole night feverish and delirious. She jumped up from
time to time, wept and wrung her hands, then sank again into feverish
sleep and dreamt of Polenka, Katerina Ivanovna and Lizaveta, of reading
the gospel and him... him with pale face, with burning eyes... kissing
her feet, weeping.

On the other side of the door on the right, which divided Sonias room
from Madame Resslichs flat, was a room which had long stood empty. A
card was fixed on the gate and a notice stuck in the windows over the
canal advertising it to let. Sonia had long been accustomed to the
rooms being uninhabited. But all that time Mr. Svidrigalov had been
standing, listening at the door of the empty room. When Raskolnikov went
out he stood still, thought a moment, went on tiptoe to his own room
which adjoined the empty one, brought a chair and noiselessly carried it
to the door that led to Sonias room. The conversation had struck him
as interesting and remarkable, and he had greatly enjoyed it--so much so
that he brought a chair that he might not in the future, to-morrow, for
instance, have to endure the inconvenience of standing a whole hour, but
might listen in comfort.



