CHAPTER I

A strange period began for Raskolnikov: it was as though a fog had
fallen upon him and wrapped him in a dreary solitude from which there
was no escape. Recalling that period long after, he believed that his
mind had been clouded at times, and that it had continued so, with
intervals, till the final catastrophe. He was convinced that he had been
mistaken about many things at that time, for instance as to the date
of certain events. Anyway, when he tried later on to piece his
recollections together, he learnt a great deal about himself from what
other people told him. He had mixed up incidents and had explained
events as due to circumstances which existed only in his imagination. At
times he was a prey to agonies of morbid uneasiness, amounting sometimes
to panic. But he remembered, too, moments, hours, perhaps whole days,
of complete apathy, which came upon him as a reaction from his previous
terror and might be compared with the abnormal insensibility, sometimes
seen in the dying. He seemed to be trying in that latter stage to escape
from a full and clear understanding of his position. Certain essential
facts which required immediate consideration were particularly irksome
to him. How glad he would have been to be free from some cares, the
neglect of which would have threatened him with complete, inevitable
ruin.

He was particularly worried about Svidrigalov, he might be said to be
permanently thinking of Svidrigalov. From the time of Svidrigalovs
too menacing and unmistakable words in Sonias room at the moment of
Katerina Ivanovnas death, the normal working of his mind seemed to
break down. But although this new fact caused him extreme uneasiness,
Raskolnikov was in no hurry for an explanation of it. At times, finding
himself in a solitary and remote part of the town, in some wretched
eating-house, sitting alone lost in thought, hardly knowing how he had
come there, he suddenly thought of Svidrigalov. He recognised
suddenly, clearly, and with dismay that he ought at once to come to an
understanding with that man and to make what terms he could. Walking
outside the city gates one day, he positively fancied that they had
fixed a meeting there, that he was waiting for Svidrigalov. Another
time he woke up before daybreak lying on the ground under some bushes
and could not at first understand how he had come there.

But during the two or three days after Katerina Ivanovnas death, he
had two or three times met Svidrigalov at Sonias lodging, where he
had gone aimlessly for a moment. They exchanged a few words and made no
reference to the vital subject, as though they were tacitly agreed not
to speak of it for a time.

Katerina Ivanovnas body was still lying in the coffin, Svidrigalov was
busy making arrangements for the funeral. Sonia too was very busy. At
their last meeting Svidrigalov informed Raskolnikov that he had made
an arrangement, and a very satisfactory one, for Katerina Ivanovnas
children; that he had, through certain connections, succeeded in getting
hold of certain personages by whose help the three orphans could be at
once placed in very suitable institutions; that the money he had settled
on them had been of great assistance, as it is much easier to place
orphans with some property than destitute ones. He said something
too about Sonia and promised to come himself in a day or two to see
Raskolnikov, mentioning that he would like to consult with him, that
there were things they must talk over....

This conversation took place in the passage on the stairs. Svidrigalov
looked intently at Raskolnikov and suddenly, after a brief pause,
dropping his voice, asked: But how is it, Rodion Romanovitch; you
dont seem yourself? You look and you listen, but you dont seem to
understand. Cheer up! Well talk things over; I am only sorry, Ive
so much to do of my own business and other peoples. Ah, Rodion
Romanovitch, he added suddenly, what all men need is fresh air, fresh
air... more than anything!

He moved to one side to make way for the priest and server, who
were coming up the stairs. They had come for the requiem service. By
Svidrigalovs orders it was sung twice a day punctually. Svidrigalov
went his way. Raskolnikov stood still a moment, thought, and followed
the priest into Sonias room. He stood at the door. They began quietly,
slowly and mournfully singing the service. From his childhood the
thought of death and the presence of death had something oppressive
and mysteriously awful; and it was long since he had heard the requiem
service. And there was something else here as well, too awful and
disturbing. He looked at the children: they were all kneeling by the
coffin; Polenka was weeping. Behind them Sonia prayed, softly and, as it
were, timidly weeping.

These last two days she hasnt said a word to me, she hasnt glanced at
me, Raskolnikov thought suddenly. The sunlight was bright in the room;
the incense rose in clouds; the priest read, Give rest, oh Lord....
 Raskolnikov stayed all through the service. As he blessed them and
took his leave, the priest looked round strangely. After the service,
Raskolnikov went up to Sonia. She took both his hands and let her
head sink on his shoulder. This slight friendly gesture bewildered
Raskolnikov. It seemed strange to him that there was no trace of
repugnance, no trace of disgust, no tremor in her hand. It was the
furthest limit of self-abnegation, at least so he interpreted it.

Sonia said nothing. Raskolnikov pressed her hand and went out. He felt
very miserable. If it had been possible to escape to some solitude, he
would have thought himself lucky, even if he had to spend his whole life
there. But although he had almost always been by himself of late, he had
never been able to feel alone. Sometimes he walked out of the town on to
the high road, once he had even reached a little wood, but the lonelier
the place was, the more he seemed to be aware of an uneasy presence near
him. It did not frighten him, but greatly annoyed him, so that he
made haste to return to the town, to mingle with the crowd, to enter
restaurants and taverns, to walk in busy thoroughfares. There he felt
easier and even more solitary. One day at dusk he sat for an hour
listening to songs in a tavern and he remembered that he positively
enjoyed it. But at last he had suddenly felt the same uneasiness again,
as though his conscience smote him. Here I sit listening to singing,
is that what I ought to be doing? he thought. Yet he felt at once
that that was not the only cause of his uneasiness; there was something
requiring immediate decision, but it was something he could not clearly
understand or put into words. It was a hopeless tangle. No, better the
struggle again! Better Porfiry again... or Svidrigalov.... Better some
challenge again... some attack. Yes, yes! he thought. He went out of
the tavern and rushed away almost at a run. The thought of Dounia and
his mother suddenly reduced him almost to a panic. That night he woke
up before morning among some bushes in Krestovsky Island, trembling
all over with fever; he walked home, and it was early morning when he
arrived. After some hours sleep the fever left him, but he woke up
late, two oclock in the afternoon.

He remembered that Katerina Ivanovnas funeral had been fixed for that
day, and was glad that he was not present at it. Nastasya brought him
some food; he ate and drank with appetite, almost with greediness. His
head was fresher and he was calmer than he had been for the last three
days. He even felt a passing wonder at his previous attacks of panic.

The door opened and Razumihin came in.

Ah, hes eating, then hes not ill, said Razumihin. He took a chair
and sat down at the table opposite Raskolnikov.

He was troubled and did not attempt to conceal it. He spoke with evident
annoyance, but without hurry or raising his voice. He looked as though
he had some special fixed determination.

Listen, he began resolutely. As far as I am concerned, you may all go
to hell, but from what I see, its clear to me that I cant make head or
tail of it; please dont think Ive come to ask you questions. I dont
want to know, hang it! If you begin telling me your secrets, I dare say
I shouldnt stay to listen, I should go away cursing. I have only come
to find out once for all whether its a fact that you are mad? There is
a conviction in the air that you are mad or very nearly so. I admit
Ive been disposed to that opinion myself, judging from your stupid,
repulsive and quite inexplicable actions, and from your recent behavior
to your mother and sister. Only a monster or a madman could treat them
as you have; so you must be mad.

When did you see them last?

Just now. Havent you seen them since then? What have you been doing
with yourself? Tell me, please. Ive been to you three times already.
Your mother has been seriously ill since yesterday. She had made up
her mind to come to you; Avdotya Romanovna tried to prevent her; she
wouldnt hear a word. If he is ill, if his mind is giving way, who can
look after him like his mother? she said. We all came here together, we
couldnt let her come alone all the way. We kept begging her to be calm.
We came in, you werent here; she sat down, and stayed ten minutes,
while we stood waiting in silence. She got up and said: If hes
gone out, that is, if he is well, and has forgotten his mother, its
humiliating and unseemly for his mother to stand at his door begging for
kindness. She returned home and took to her bed; now she is in a fever.
I see, she said, that he has time for _his girl_. She means by _your
girl_ Sofya Semyonovna, your betrothed or your mistress, I dont know. I
went at once to Sofya Semyonovnas, for I wanted to know what was going
on. I looked round, I saw the coffin, the children crying, and
Sofya Semyonovna trying them on mourning dresses. No sign of you. I
apologised, came away, and reported to Avdotya Romanovna. So thats all
nonsense and you havent got a girl; the most likely thing is that you
are mad. But here you sit, guzzling boiled beef as though youd not had
a bite for three days. Though as far as that goes, madmen eat too, but
though you have not said a word to me yet... you are not mad! That Id
swear! Above all, you are not mad! So you may go to hell, all of you,
for theres some mystery, some secret about it, and I dont intend to
worry my brains over your secrets. So Ive simply come to swear at you,
 he finished, getting up, to relieve my mind. And I know what to do
now.

What do you mean to do now?

What business is it of yours what I mean to do?

You are going in for a drinking bout.

How... how did you know?

Why, its pretty plain.

Razumihin paused for a minute.

You always have been a very rational person and youve never been mad,
never, he observed suddenly with warmth. Youre right: I shall drink.
Good-bye!

And he moved to go out.

I was talking with my sister--the day before yesterday, I think it
was--about you, Razumihin.

About me! But... where can you have seen her the day before yesterday?
 Razumihin stopped short and even turned a little pale.

One could see that his heart was throbbing slowly and violently.

She came here by herself, sat there and talked to me.

She did!

Yes.

What did you say to her... I mean, about me?

I told her you were a very good, honest, and industrious man. I didnt
tell her you love her, because she knows that herself.

She knows that herself?

Well, its pretty plain. Wherever I might go, whatever happened to me,
you would remain to look after them. I, so to speak, give them into your
keeping, Razumihin. I say this because I know quite well how you love
her, and am convinced of the purity of your heart. I know that she too
may love you and perhaps does love you already. Now decide for yourself,
as you know best, whether you need go in for a drinking bout or not.

Rodya! You see... well.... Ach, damn it! But where do you mean to go?
Of course, if its all a secret, never mind.... But I... I shall find
out the secret... and I am sure that it must be some ridiculous nonsense
and that youve made it all up. Anyway you are a capital fellow, a
capital fellow!...

That was just what I wanted to add, only you interrupted, that that was
a very good decision of yours not to find out these secrets. Leave it to
time, dont worry about it. Youll know it all in time when it must be.
Yesterday a man said to me that what a man needs is fresh air, fresh
air, fresh air. I mean to go to him directly to find out what he meant
by that.

Razumihin stood lost in thought and excitement, making a silent
conclusion.

Hes a political conspirator! He must be. And hes on the eve of some
desperate step, thats certain. It can only be that! And... and Dounia
knows, he thought suddenly.

So Avdotya Romanovna comes to see you, he said, weighing each
syllable, and youre going to see a man who says we need more air, and
so of course that letter... that too must have something to do with it,
 he concluded to himself.

What letter?

She got a letter to-day. It upset her very much--very much indeed. Too
much so. I began speaking of you, she begged me not to. Then... then
she said that perhaps we should very soon have to part... then she began
warmly thanking me for something; then she went to her room and locked
herself in.

She got a letter? Raskolnikov asked thoughtfully.

Yes, and you didnt know? hm...

They were both silent.

Good-bye, Rodion. There was a time, brother, when I.... Never mind,
good-bye. You see, there was a time.... Well, good-bye! I must be off
too. I am not going to drink. Theres no need now.... Thats all stuff!

He hurried out; but when he had almost closed the door behind him, he
suddenly opened it again, and said, looking away:

Oh, by the way, do you remember that murder, you know Porfirys, that
old woman? Do you know the murderer has been found, he has confessed
and given the proofs. Its one of those very workmen, the painter, only
fancy! Do you remember I defended them here? Would you believe it, all
that scene of fighting and laughing with his companions on the stairs
while the porter and the two witnesses were going up, he got up on
purpose to disarm suspicion. The cunning, the presence of mind of the
young dog! One can hardly credit it; but its his own explanation, he
has confessed it all. And what a fool I was about it! Well, hes simply
a genius of hypocrisy and resourcefulness in disarming the suspicions of
the lawyers--so theres nothing much to wonder at, I suppose! Of course
people like that are always possible. And the fact that he couldnt keep
up the character, but confessed, makes him easier to believe in. But
what a fool I was! I was frantic on their side!

Tell me, please, from whom did you hear that, and why does it interest
you so? Raskolnikov asked with unmistakable agitation.

What next? You ask me why it interests me!... Well, I heard it from
Porfiry, among others... It was from him I heard almost all about it.

From Porfiry?

From Porfiry.

What... what did he say? Raskolnikov asked in dismay.

He gave me a capital explanation of it. Psychologically, after his
fashion.

He explained it? Explained it himself?

Yes, yes; good-bye. Ill tell you all about it another time, but now
Im busy. There was a time when I fancied... But no matter, another
time!... What need is there for me to drink now? You have made me drunk
without wine. I am drunk, Rodya! Good-bye, Im going. Ill come again
very soon.

He went out.

Hes a political conspirator, theres not a doubt about it, Razumihin
decided, as he slowly descended the stairs. And hes drawn his sister
in; thats quite, quite in keeping with Avdotya Romanovnas character.
There are interviews between them!... She hinted at it too... So many of
her words.... and hints... bear that meaning! And how else can all this
tangle be explained? Hm! And I was almost thinking... Good heavens,
what I thought! Yes, I took leave of my senses and I wronged him! It was
his doing, under the lamp in the corridor that day. Pfoo! What a crude,
nasty, vile idea on my part! Nikolay is a brick, for confessing.... And
how clear it all is now! His illness then, all his strange actions...
before this, in the university, how morose he used to be, how gloomy....
But whats the meaning now of that letter? Theres something in that,
too, perhaps. Whom was it from? I suspect...! No, I must find out!

He thought of Dounia, realising all he had heard and his heart throbbed,
and he suddenly broke into a run.

As soon as Razumihin went out, Raskolnikov got up, turned to the window,
walked into one corner and then into another, as though forgetting the
smallness of his room, and sat down again on the sofa. He felt, so to
speak, renewed; again the struggle, so a means of escape had come.

Yes, a means of escape had come! It had been too stifling, too
cramping, the burden had been too agonising. A lethargy had come upon
him at times. From the moment of the scene with Nikolay at Porfirys he
had been suffocating, penned in without hope of escape. After Nikolays
confession, on that very day had come the scene with Sonia; his
behaviour and his last words had been utterly unlike anything he
could have imagined beforehand; he had grown feebler, instantly and
fundamentally! And he had agreed at the time with Sonia, he had agreed
in his heart he could not go on living alone with such a thing on his
mind!

And Svidrigalov was a riddle... He worried him, that was true, but
somehow not on the same point. He might still have a struggle to come
with Svidrigalov. Svidrigalov, too, might be a means of escape; but
Porfiry was a different matter.

And so Porfiry himself had explained it to Razumihin, had explained it
_psychologically_. He had begun bringing in his damned psychology again!
Porfiry? But to think that Porfiry should for one moment believe that
Nikolay was guilty, after what had passed between them before Nikolays
appearance, after that tte--tte interview, which could have only
_one_ explanation? (During those days Raskolnikov had often recalled
passages in that scene with Porfiry; he could not bear to let his mind
rest on it.) Such words, such gestures had passed between them, they
had exchanged such glances, things had been said in such a tone and had
reached such a pass, that Nikolay, whom Porfiry had seen through at the
first word, at the first gesture, could not have shaken his conviction.

And to think that even Razumihin had begun to suspect! The scene in the
corridor under the lamp had produced its effect then. He had rushed to
Porfiry.... But what had induced the latter to receive him like that?
What had been his object in putting Razumihin off with Nikolay? He must
have some plan; there was some design, but what was it? It was true that
a long time had passed since that morning--too long a time--and no sight
nor sound of Porfiry. Well, that was a bad sign....

Raskolnikov took his cap and went out of the room, still pondering. It
was the first time for a long while that he had felt clear in his mind,
at least. I must settle Svidrigalov, he thought, and as soon as
possible; he, too, seems to be waiting for me to come to him of my own
accord. And at that moment there was such a rush of hate in his
weary heart that he might have killed either of those two--Porfiry or
Svidrigalov. At least he felt that he would be capable of doing it
later, if not now.

We shall see, we shall see, he repeated to himself.

But no sooner had he opened the door than he stumbled upon Porfiry
himself in the passage. He was coming in to see him. Raskolnikov was
dumbfounded for a minute, but only for one minute. Strange to say, he
was not very much astonished at seeing Porfiry and scarcely afraid of
him. He was simply startled, but was quickly, instantly, on his guard.
Perhaps this will mean the end? But how could Porfiry have approached
so quietly, like a cat, so that he had heard nothing? Could he have been
listening at the door?

You didnt expect a visitor, Rodion Romanovitch, Porfiry explained,
laughing. Ive been meaning to look in a long time; I was passing by
and thought why not go in for five minutes. Are you going out? I wont
keep you long. Just let me have one cigarette.

Sit down, Porfiry Petrovitch, sit down. Raskolnikov gave his visitor
a seat with so pleased and friendly an expression that he would have
marvelled at himself, if he could have seen it.

The last moment had come, the last drops had to be drained! So a man
will sometimes go through half an hour of mortal terror with a brigand,
yet when the knife is at his throat at last, he feels no fear.

Raskolnikov seated himself directly facing Porfiry, and looked at him
without flinching. Porfiry screwed up his eyes and began lighting a
cigarette.

Speak, speak, seemed as though it would burst from Raskolnikovs
heart. Come, why dont you speak?



