CHAPTER II

Razumihin waked up next morning at eight oclock, troubled and serious.
He found himself confronted with many new and unlooked-for perplexities.
He had never expected that he would ever wake up feeling like that. He
remembered every detail of the previous day and he knew that a perfectly
novel experience had befallen him, that he had received an impression
unlike anything he had known before. At the same time he recognised
clearly that the dream which had fired his imagination was hopelessly
unattainable--so unattainable that he felt positively ashamed of it, and
he hastened to pass to the other more practical cares and difficulties
bequeathed him by that thrice accursed yesterday.

The most awful recollection of the previous day was the way he had shown
himself base and mean, not only because he had been drunk, but
because he had taken advantage of the young girls position to abuse
her _fianc_ in his stupid jealousy, knowing nothing of their mutual
relations and obligations and next to nothing of the man himself. And
what right had he to criticise him in that hasty and unguarded manner?
Who had asked for his opinion? Was it thinkable that such a creature as
Avdotya Romanovna would be marrying an unworthy man for money? So there
must be something in him. The lodgings? But after all how could he know
the character of the lodgings? He was furnishing a flat... Foo! how
despicable it all was! And what justification was it that he was drunk?
Such a stupid excuse was even more degrading! In wine is truth, and the
truth had all come out, that is, all the uncleanness of his coarse
and envious heart! And would such a dream ever be permissible to
him, Razumihin? What was he beside such a girl--he, the drunken noisy
braggart of last night? Was it possible to imagine so absurd and cynical
a juxtaposition? Razumihin blushed desperately at the very idea and
suddenly the recollection forced itself vividly upon him of how he had
said last night on the stairs that the landlady would be jealous of
Avdotya Romanovna... that was simply intolerable. He brought his fist
down heavily on the kitchen stove, hurt his hand and sent one of the
bricks flying.

Of course, he muttered to himself a minute later with a feeling of
self-abasement, of course, all these infamies can never be wiped out or
smoothed over... and so its useless even to think of it, and I must
go to them in silence and do my duty... in silence, too... and not ask
forgiveness, and say nothing... for all is lost now!

And yet as he dressed he examined his attire more carefully than usual.
He hadnt another suit--if he had had, perhaps he wouldnt have put it
on. I would have made a point of not putting it on. But in any case he
could not remain a cynic and a dirty sloven; he had no right to offend
the feelings of others, especially when they were in need of his
assistance and asking him to see them. He brushed his clothes carefully.
His linen was always decent; in that respect he was especially clean.

He washed that morning scrupulously--he got some soap from Nastasya--he
washed his hair, his neck and especially his hands. When it came to the
question whether to shave his stubbly chin or not (Praskovya Pavlovna
had capital razors that had been left by her late husband), the question
was angrily answered in the negative. Let it stay as it is! What if
they think that I shaved on purpose to...? They certainly would think
so! Not on any account!

And... the worst of it was he was so coarse, so dirty, he had the
manners of a pothouse; and... and even admitting that he knew he had
some of the essentials of a gentleman... what was there in that to be
proud of? Everyone ought to be a gentleman and more than that... and all
the same (he remembered) he, too, had done little things... not exactly
dishonest, and yet.... And what thoughts he sometimes had; hm... and to
set all that beside Avdotya Romanovna! Confound it! So be it! Well, hed
make a point then of being dirty, greasy, pothouse in his manners and he
wouldnt care! Hed be worse!

He was engaged in such monologues when Zossimov, who had spent the night
in Praskovya Pavlovnas parlour, came in.

He was going home and was in a hurry to look at the invalid first.
Razumihin informed him that Raskolnikov was sleeping like a dormouse.
Zossimov gave orders that they shouldnt wake him and promised to see
him again about eleven.

If he is still at home, he added. Damn it all! If one cant control
ones patients, how is one to cure them? Do you know whether _he_ will
go to them, or whether _they_ are coming here?

They are coming, I think, said Razumihin, understanding the object
of the question, and they will discuss their family affairs, no doubt.
Ill be off. You, as the doctor, have more right to be here than I.

But I am not a father confessor; I shall come and go away; Ive plenty
to do besides looking after them.

One thing worries me, interposed Razumihin, frowning. On the way home
I talked a lot of drunken nonsense to him... all sorts of things... and
amongst them that you were afraid that he... might become insane.

You told the ladies so, too.

I know it was stupid! You may beat me if you like! Did you think so
seriously?

Thats nonsense, I tell you, how could I think it seriously? You,
yourself, described him as a monomaniac when you fetched me to
him... and we added fuel to the fire yesterday, you did, that is, with
your story about the painter; it was a nice conversation, when he was,
perhaps, mad on that very point! If only Id known what happened then
at the police station and that some wretch... had insulted him with this
suspicion! Hm... I would not have allowed that conversation yesterday.
These monomaniacs will make a mountain out of a mole-hill... and
see their fancies as solid realities.... As far as I remember, it was
Zametovs story that cleared up half the mystery, to my mind. Why, I
know one case in which a hypochondriac, a man of forty, cut the throat
of a little boy of eight, because he couldnt endure the jokes he made
every day at table! And in this case his rags, the insolent police
officer, the fever and this suspicion! All that working upon a man half
frantic with hypochondria, and with his morbid exceptional vanity! That
may well have been the starting-point of illness. Well, bother it
all!... And, by the way, that Zametov certainly is a nice fellow, but
hm... he shouldnt have told all that last night. He is an awful
chatterbox!

But whom did he tell it to? You and me?

And Porfiry.

What does that matter?

And, by the way, have you any influence on them, his mother and sister?
Tell them to be more careful with him to-day....

Theyll get on all right! Razumihin answered reluctantly.

Why is he so set against this Luzhin? A man with money and she doesnt
seem to dislike him... and they havent a farthing, I suppose? eh?

But what business is it of yours? Razumihin cried with annoyance. How
can I tell whether theyve a farthing? Ask them yourself and perhaps
youll find out....

Foo! what an ass you are sometimes! Last nights wine has not gone off
yet.... Good-bye; thank your Praskovya Pavlovna from me for my nights
lodging. She locked herself in, made no reply to my _bonjour_ through
the door; she was up at seven oclock, the samovar was taken into her
from the kitchen. I was not vouchsafed a personal interview....

At nine oclock precisely Razumihin reached the lodgings at Bakaleyevs
house. Both ladies were waiting for him with nervous impatience. They
had risen at seven oclock or earlier. He entered looking as black as
night, bowed awkwardly and was at once furious with himself for it. He
had reckoned without his host: Pulcheria Alexandrovna fairly rushed at
him, seized him by both hands and was almost kissing them. He glanced
timidly at Avdotya Romanovna, but her proud countenance wore at that
moment an expression of such gratitude and friendliness, such
complete and unlooked-for respect (in place of the sneering looks and
ill-disguised contempt he had expected), that it threw him into greater
confusion than if he had been met with abuse. Fortunately there was a
subject for conversation, and he made haste to snatch at it.

Hearing that everything was going well and that Rodya had not yet waked,
Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared that she was glad to hear it, because
she had something which it was very, very necessary to talk over
beforehand. Then followed an inquiry about breakfast and an invitation
to have it with them; they had waited to have it with him. Avdotya
Romanovna rang the bell: it was answered by a ragged dirty waiter, and
they asked him to bring tea which was served at last, but in such
a dirty and disorderly way that the ladies were ashamed. Razumihin
vigorously attacked the lodgings, but, remembering Luzhin, stopped
in embarrassment and was greatly relieved by Pulcheria Alexandrovnas
questions, which showered in a continual stream upon him.

He talked for three quarters of an hour, being constantly interrupted
by their questions, and succeeded in describing to them all the
most important facts he knew of the last year of Raskolnikovs life,
concluding with a circumstantial account of his illness. He omitted,
however, many things, which were better omitted, including the scene at
the police station with all its consequences. They listened eagerly
to his story, and, when he thought he had finished and satisfied his
listeners, he found that they considered he had hardly begun.

Tell me, tell me! What do you think...? Excuse me, I still dont know
your name! Pulcheria Alexandrovna put in hastily.

Dmitri Prokofitch.

I should like very, very much to know, Dmitri Prokofitch... how he
looks... on things in general now, that is, how can I explain, what are
his likes and dislikes? Is he always so irritable? Tell me, if you can,
what are his hopes and, so to say, his dreams? Under what influences is
he now? In a word, I should like...

Ah, mother, how can he answer all that at once? observed Dounia.

Good heavens, I had not expected to find him in the least like this,
Dmitri Prokofitch!

Naturally, answered Razumihin. I have no mother, but my uncle comes
every year and almost every time he can scarcely recognise me, even in
appearance, though he is a clever man; and your three years separation
means a great deal. What am I to tell you? I have known Rodion for
a year and a half; he is morose, gloomy, proud and haughty, and of
late--and perhaps for a long time before--he has been suspicious and
fanciful. He has a noble nature and a kind heart. He does not like
showing his feelings and would rather do a cruel thing than open his
heart freely. Sometimes, though, he is not at all morbid, but simply
cold and inhumanly callous; its as though he were alternating between
two characters. Sometimes he is fearfully reserved! He says he is
so busy that everything is a hindrance, and yet he lies in bed doing
nothing. He doesnt jeer at things, not because he hasnt the wit, but
as though he hadnt time to waste on such trifles. He never listens
to what is said to him. He is never interested in what interests other
people at any given moment. He thinks very highly of himself and perhaps
he is right. Well, what more? I think your arrival will have a most
beneficial influence upon him.

God grant it may, cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, distressed by
Razumihins account of her Rodya.

And Razumihin ventured to look more boldly at Avdotya Romanovna at last.
He glanced at her often while he was talking, but only for a moment and
looked away again at once. Avdotya Romanovna sat at the table, listening
attentively, then got up again and began walking to and fro with her
arms folded and her lips compressed, occasionally putting in a question,
without stopping her walk. She had the same habit of not listening to
what was said. She was wearing a dress of thin dark stuff and she had a
white transparent scarf round her neck. Razumihin soon detected signs of
extreme poverty in their belongings. Had Avdotya Romanovna been dressed
like a queen, he felt that he would not be afraid of her, but perhaps
just because she was poorly dressed and that he noticed all the misery
of her surroundings, his heart was filled with dread and he began to be
afraid of every word he uttered, every gesture he made, which was very
trying for a man who already felt diffident.

Youve told us a great deal that is interesting about my brothers
character... and have told it impartially. I am glad. I thought that you
were too uncritically devoted to him, observed Avdotya Romanovna with
a smile. I think you are right that he needs a womans care, she added
thoughtfully.

I didnt say so; but I daresay you are right, only...

What?

He loves no one and perhaps he never will, Razumihin declared
decisively.

You mean he is not capable of love?

Do you know, Avdotya Romanovna, you are awfully like your brother, in
everything, indeed! he blurted out suddenly to his own surprise, but
remembering at once what he had just before said of her brother,
he turned as red as a crab and was overcome with confusion. Avdotya
Romanovna couldnt help laughing when she looked at him.

You may both be mistaken about Rodya, Pulcheria Alexandrovna remarked,
slightly piqued. I am not talking of our present difficulty, Dounia.
What Pyotr Petrovitch writes in this letter and what you and I have
supposed may be mistaken, but you cant imagine, Dmitri Prokofitch, how
moody and, so to say, capricious he is. I never could depend on what
he would do when he was only fifteen. And I am sure that he might
do something now that nobody else would think of doing... Well, for
instance, do you know how a year and a half ago he astounded me and gave
me a shock that nearly killed me, when he had the idea of marrying that
girl--what was her name--his landladys daughter?

Did you hear about that affair? asked Avdotya Romanovna.

Do you suppose---- Pulcheria Alexandrovna continued warmly. Do you
suppose that my tears, my entreaties, my illness, my possible death from
grief, our poverty would have made him pause? No, he would calmly have
disregarded all obstacles. And yet it isnt that he doesnt love us!

He has never spoken a word of that affair to me, Razumihin answered
cautiously. But I did hear something from Praskovya Pavlovna herself,
though she is by no means a gossip. And what I heard certainly was
rather strange.

And what did you hear? both the ladies asked at once.

Well, nothing very special. I only learned that the marriage, which
only failed to take place through the girls death, was not at all to
Praskovya Pavlovnas liking. They say, too, the girl was not at all
pretty, in fact I am told positively ugly... and such an invalid... and
queer. But she seems to have had some good qualities. She must have
had some good qualities or its quite inexplicable.... She had no money
either and he wouldnt have considered her money.... But its always
difficult to judge in such matters.

I am sure she was a good girl, Avdotya Romanovna observed briefly.

God forgive me, I simply rejoiced at her death. Though I dont know
which of them would have caused most misery to the other--he to her
or she to him, Pulcheria Alexandrovna concluded. Then she began
tentatively questioning him about the scene on the previous day with
Luzhin, hesitating and continually glancing at Dounia, obviously to
the latters annoyance. This incident more than all the rest evidently
caused her uneasiness, even consternation. Razumihin described it in
detail again, but this time he added his own conclusions: he openly
blamed Raskolnikov for intentionally insulting Pyotr Petrovitch, not
seeking to excuse him on the score of his illness.

He had planned it before his illness, he added.

I think so, too, Pulcheria Alexandrovna agreed with a dejected air.
But she was very much surprised at hearing Razumihin express himself
so carefully and even with a certain respect about Pyotr Petrovitch.
Avdotya Romanovna, too, was struck by it.

So this is your opinion of Pyotr Petrovitch? Pulcheria Alexandrovna
could not resist asking.

I can have no other opinion of your daughters future husband,
 Razumihin answered firmly and with warmth, and I dont say it simply
from vulgar politeness, but because... simply because Avdotya Romanovna
has of her own free will deigned to accept this man. If I spoke so
rudely of him last night, it was because I was disgustingly drunk and...
mad besides; yes, mad, crazy, I lost my head completely... and this
morning I am ashamed of it.

He crimsoned and ceased speaking. Avdotya Romanovna flushed, but did not
break the silence. She had not uttered a word from the moment they began
to speak of Luzhin.

Without her support Pulcheria Alexandrovna obviously did not know what
to do. At last, faltering and continually glancing at her daughter, she
confessed that she was exceedingly worried by one circumstance.

You see, Dmitri Prokofitch, she began. Ill be perfectly open with
Dmitri Prokofitch, Dounia?

Of course, mother, said Avdotya Romanovna emphatically.

This is what it is, she began in haste, as though the permission to
speak of her trouble lifted a weight off her mind. Very early this
morning we got a note from Pyotr Petrovitch in reply to our letter
announcing our arrival. He promised to meet us at the station, you
know; instead of that he sent a servant to bring us the address of these
lodgings and to show us the way; and he sent a message that he would
be here himself this morning. But this morning this note came from him.
Youd better read it yourself; there is one point in it which worries me
very much... you will soon see what that is, and... tell me your candid
opinion, Dmitri Prokofitch! You know Rodyas character better than
anyone and no one can advise us better than you can. Dounia, I must tell
you, made her decision at once, but I still dont feel sure how to act
and I... Ive been waiting for your opinion.

Razumihin opened the note which was dated the previous evening and read
as follows:

Dear Madam, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, I have the honour to inform you
that owing to unforeseen obstacles I was rendered unable to meet you at
the railway station; I sent a very competent person with the same object
in view. I likewise shall be deprived of the honour of an interview with
you to-morrow morning by business in the Senate that does not admit of
delay, and also that I may not intrude on your family circle while you
are meeting your son, and Avdotya Romanovna her brother. I shall have
the honour of visiting you and paying you my respects at your lodgings
not later than to-morrow evening at eight oclock precisely, and
herewith I venture to present my earnest and, I may add, imperative
request that Rodion Romanovitch may not be present at our interview--as
he offered me a gross and unprecedented affront on the occasion of my
visit to him in his illness yesterday, and, moreover, since I desire
from you personally an indispensable and circumstantial explanation
upon a certain point, in regard to which I wish to learn your own
interpretation. I have the honour to inform you, in anticipation,
that if, in spite of my request, I meet Rodion Romanovitch, I shall be
compelled to withdraw immediately and then you have only yourself to
blame. I write on the assumption that Rodion Romanovitch who appeared so
ill at my visit, suddenly recovered two hours later and so, being able
to leave the house, may visit you also. I was confirmed in that belief
by the testimony of my own eyes in the lodging of a drunken man who
was run over and has since died, to whose daughter, a young woman of
notorious behaviour, he gave twenty-five roubles on the pretext of the
funeral, which gravely surprised me knowing what pains you were at to
raise that sum. Herewith expressing my special respect to your estimable
daughter, Avdotya Romanovna, I beg you to accept the respectful homage
of

Your humble servant,

P. LUZHIN.


What am I to do now, Dmitri Prokofitch? began Pulcheria Alexandrovna,
almost weeping. How can I ask Rodya not to come? Yesterday he insisted
so earnestly on our refusing Pyotr Petrovitch and now we are ordered not
to receive Rodya! He will come on purpose if he knows, and... what will
happen then?

Act on Avdotya Romanovnas decision, Razumihin answered calmly at
once.

Oh, dear me! She says... goodness knows what she says, she doesnt
explain her object! She says that it would be best, at least, not that
it would be best, but that its absolutely necessary that Rodya should
make a point of being here at eight oclock and that they must meet....
I didnt want even to show him the letter, but to prevent him
from coming by some stratagem with your help... because he is so
irritable.... Besides I dont understand about that drunkard who died
and that daughter, and how he could have given the daughter all the
money... which...

Which cost you such sacrifice, mother, put in Avdotya Romanovna.

He was not himself yesterday, Razumihin said thoughtfully, if you
only knew what he was up to in a restaurant yesterday, though there
was sense in it too.... Hm! He did say something, as we were going home
yesterday evening, about a dead man and a girl, but I didnt understand
a word.... But last night, I myself...

The best thing, mother, will be for us to go to him ourselves and
there I assure you we shall see at once whats to be done. Besides,
its getting late--good heavens, its past ten, she cried looking at
a splendid gold enamelled watch which hung round her neck on a thin
Venetian chain, and looked entirely out of keeping with the rest of her
dress. A present from her _fianc_, thought Razumihin.

We must start, Dounia, we must start, her mother cried in a flutter.
He will be thinking we are still angry after yesterday, from our coming
so late. Merciful heavens!

While she said this she was hurriedly putting on her hat and mantle;
Dounia, too, put on her things. Her gloves, as Razumihin noticed, were
not merely shabby but had holes in them, and yet this evident poverty
gave the two ladies an air of special dignity, which is always found in
people who know how to wear poor clothes. Razumihin looked reverently
at Dounia and felt proud of escorting her. The queen who mended her
stockings in prison, he thought, must have looked then every inch a
queen and even more a queen than at sumptuous banquets and leves.

My God! exclaimed Pulcheria Alexandrovna, little did I think that I
should ever fear seeing my son, my darling, darling Rodya! I am afraid,
Dmitri Prokofitch, she added, glancing at him timidly.

Dont be afraid, mother, said Dounia, kissing her, better have faith
in him.

Oh, dear, I have faith in him, but I havent slept all night,
 exclaimed the poor woman.

They came out into the street.

Do you know, Dounia, when I dozed a little this morning I dreamed of
Marfa Petrovna... she was all in white... she came up to me, took
my hand, and shook her head at me, but so sternly as though she were
blaming me.... Is that a good omen? Oh, dear me! You dont know, Dmitri
Prokofitch, that Marfa Petrovnas dead!

No, I didnt know; who is Marfa Petrovna?

She died suddenly; and only fancy...

Afterwards, mamma, put in Dounia. He doesnt know who Marfa Petrovna
is.

Ah, you dont know? And I was thinking that you knew all about us.
Forgive me, Dmitri Prokofitch, I dont know what I am thinking about
these last few days. I look upon you really as a providence for us, and
so I took it for granted that you knew all about us. I look on you as a
relation.... Dont be angry with me for saying so. Dear me, whats the
matter with your right hand? Have you knocked it?

Yes, I bruised it, muttered Razumihin overjoyed.

I sometimes speak too much from the heart, so that Dounia finds fault
with me.... But, dear me, what a cupboard he lives in! I wonder whether
he is awake? Does this woman, his landlady, consider it a room? Listen,
you say he does not like to show his feelings, so perhaps I shall annoy
him with my... weaknesses? Do advise me, Dmitri Prokofitch, how am I to
treat him? I feel quite distracted, you know.

Dont question him too much about anything if you see him frown; dont
ask him too much about his health; he doesnt like that.

Ah, Dmitri Prokofitch, how hard it is to be a mother! But here are the
stairs.... What an awful staircase!

Mother, you are quite pale, dont distress yourself, darling, said
Dounia caressing her, then with flashing eyes she added: He ought to be
happy at seeing you, and you are tormenting yourself so.

Wait, Ill peep in and see whether he has waked up.

The ladies slowly followed Razumihin, who went on before, and when they
reached the landladys door on the fourth storey, they noticed that her
door was a tiny crack open and that two keen black eyes were watching
them from the darkness within. When their eyes met, the door was
suddenly shut with such a slam that Pulcheria Alexandrovna almost cried
out.



