CHAPTER VII

An elegant carriage stood in the middle of the road with a pair of
spirited grey horses; there was no one in it, and the coachman had got
off his box and stood by; the horses were being held by the bridle....
A mass of people had gathered round, the police standing in front. One
of them held a lighted lantern which he was turning on something lying
close to the wheels. Everyone was talking, shouting, exclaiming; the
coachman seemed at a loss and kept repeating:

What a misfortune! Good Lord, what a misfortune!

Raskolnikov pushed his way in as far as he could, and succeeded at last
in seeing the object of the commotion and interest. On the ground a
man who had been run over lay apparently unconscious, and covered with
blood; he was very badly dressed, but not like a workman. Blood was
flowing from his head and face; his face was crushed, mutilated and
disfigured. He was evidently badly injured.

Merciful heaven! wailed the coachman, what more could I do? If Id
been driving fast or had not shouted to him, but I was going quietly,
not in a hurry. Everyone could see I was going along just like everybody
else. A drunken man cant walk straight, we all know.... I saw him
crossing the street, staggering and almost falling. I shouted again
and a second and a third time, then I held the horses in, but he fell
straight under their feet! Either he did it on purpose or he was very
tipsy.... The horses are young and ready to take fright... they started,
he screamed... that made them worse. Thats how it happened!

Thats just how it was, a voice in the crowd confirmed.

He shouted, thats true, he shouted three times, another voice
declared.

Three times it was, we all heard it, shouted a third.

But the coachman was not very much distressed and frightened. It was
evident that the carriage belonged to a rich and important person who
was awaiting it somewhere; the police, of course, were in no little
anxiety to avoid upsetting his arrangements. All they had to do was to
take the injured man to the police station and the hospital. No one knew
his name.

Meanwhile Raskolnikov had squeezed in and stooped closer over him. The
lantern suddenly lighted up the unfortunate mans face. He recognised
him.

I know him! I know him! he shouted, pushing to the front. Its a
government clerk retired from the service, Marmeladov. He lives close
by in Kozels house.... Make haste for a doctor! I will pay, see? He
pulled money out of his pocket and showed it to the policeman. He was in
violent agitation.

The police were glad that they had found out who the man was.
Raskolnikov gave his own name and address, and, as earnestly as if it
had been his father, he besought the police to carry the unconscious
Marmeladov to his lodging at once.

Just here, three houses away, he said eagerly, the house belongs to
Kozel, a rich German. He was going home, no doubt drunk. I know him,
he is a drunkard. He has a family there, a wife, children, he has one
daughter.... It will take time to take him to the hospital, and there is
sure to be a doctor in the house. Ill pay, Ill pay! At least he will
be looked after at home... they will help him at once. But hell die
before you get him to the hospital. He managed to slip something
unseen into the policemans hand. But the thing was straightforward
and legitimate, and in any case help was closer here. They raised the
injured man; people volunteered to help.

Kozels house was thirty yards away. Raskolnikov walked behind,
carefully holding Marmeladovs head and showing the way.

This way, this way! We must take him upstairs head foremost. Turn
round! Ill pay, Ill make it worth your while, he muttered.

Katerina Ivanovna had just begun, as she always did at every free
moment, walking to and fro in her little room from window to stove and
back again, with her arms folded across her chest, talking to herself
and coughing. Of late she had begun to talk more than ever to her eldest
girl, Polenka, a child of ten, who, though there was much she did not
understand, understood very well that her mother needed her, and so
always watched her with her big clever eyes and strove her utmost
to appear to understand. This time Polenka was undressing her little
brother, who had been unwell all day and was going to bed. The boy was
waiting for her to take off his shirt, which had to be washed at night.
He was sitting straight and motionless on a chair, with a silent,
serious face, with his legs stretched out straight before him--heels
together and toes turned out.

He was listening to what his mother was saying to his sister, sitting
perfectly still with pouting lips and wide-open eyes, just as all good
little boys have to sit when they are undressed to go to bed. A little
girl, still younger, dressed literally in rags, stood at the screen,
waiting for her turn. The door on to the stairs was open to relieve
them a little from the clouds of tobacco smoke which floated in from the
other rooms and brought on long terrible fits of coughing in the poor,
consumptive woman. Katerina Ivanovna seemed to have grown even thinner
during that week and the hectic flush on her face was brighter than
ever.

You wouldnt believe, you cant imagine, Polenka, she said, walking
about the room, what a happy luxurious life we had in my papas house
and how this drunkard has brought me, and will bring you all, to ruin!
Papa was a civil colonel and only a step from being a governor; so that
everyone who came to see him said, We look upon you, Ivan Mihailovitch,
as our governor! When I... when... she coughed violently, oh, cursed
life, she cried, clearing her throat and pressing her hands to her
breast, when I... when at the last ball... at the marshals...
Princess Bezzemelny saw me--who gave me the blessing when your father
and I were married, Polenka--she asked at once Isnt that the pretty
girl who danced the shawl dance at the breaking-up? (You must mend
that tear, you must take your needle and darn it as I showed you, or
to-morrow--cough, cough, cough--he will make the hole bigger, she
articulated with effort.) Prince Schegolskoy, a kammerjunker, had just
come from Petersburg then... he danced the mazurka with me and wanted to
make me an offer next day; but I thanked him in flattering expressions
and told him that my heart had long been anothers. That other was your
father, Polya; papa was fearfully angry.... Is the water ready? Give me
the shirt, and the stockings! Lida, said she to the youngest one, you
must manage without your chemise to-night... and lay your stockings out
with it... Ill wash them together.... How is it that drunken vagabond
doesnt come in? He has worn his shirt till it looks like a dish-clout,
he has torn it to rags! Id do it all together, so as not to have to
work two nights running! Oh, dear! (Cough, cough, cough, cough!) Again!
Whats this? she cried, noticing a crowd in the passage and the men,
who were pushing into her room, carrying a burden. What is it? What are
they bringing? Mercy on us!

Where are we to put him? asked the policeman, looking round when
Marmeladov, unconscious and covered with blood, had been carried in.

On the sofa! Put him straight on the sofa, with his head this way,
 Raskolnikov showed him.

Run over in the road! Drunk! someone shouted in the passage.

Katerina Ivanovna stood, turning white and gasping for breath. The
children were terrified. Little Lida screamed, rushed to Polenka and
clutched at her, trembling all over.

Having laid Marmeladov down, Raskolnikov flew to Katerina Ivanovna.

For Gods sake be calm, dont be frightened! he said, speaking
quickly, he was crossing the road and was run over by a carriage, dont
be frightened, he will come to, I told them bring him here... Ive been
here already, you remember? He will come to; Ill pay!

Hes done it this time! Katerina Ivanovna cried despairingly and she
rushed to her husband.

Raskolnikov noticed at once that she was not one of those women who
swoon easily. She instantly placed under the luckless mans head a
pillow, which no one had thought of and began undressing and examining
him. She kept her head, forgetting herself, biting her trembling lips
and stifling the screams which were ready to break from her.

Raskolnikov meanwhile induced someone to run for a doctor. There was a
doctor, it appeared, next door but one.

Ive sent for a doctor, he kept assuring Katerina Ivanovna, dont be
uneasy, Ill pay. Havent you water?... and give me a napkin or a towel,
anything, as quick as you can.... He is injured, but not killed, believe
me.... We shall see what the doctor says!

Katerina Ivanovna ran to the window; there, on a broken chair in the
corner, a large earthenware basin full of water had been stood, in
readiness for washing her childrens and husbands linen that night.
This washing was done by Katerina Ivanovna at night at least twice a
week, if not oftener. For the family had come to such a pass that they
were practically without change of linen, and Katerina Ivanovna could
not endure uncleanliness and, rather than see dirt in the house, she
preferred to wear herself out at night, working beyond her strength when
the rest were asleep, so as to get the wet linen hung on a line and dry
by the morning. She took up the basin of water at Raskolnikovs request,
but almost fell down with her burden. But the latter had already
succeeded in finding a towel, wetted it and began washing the blood off
Marmeladovs face.

Katerina Ivanovna stood by, breathing painfully and pressing her hands
to her breast. She was in need of attention herself. Raskolnikov began
to realise that he might have made a mistake in having the injured man
brought here. The policeman, too, stood in hesitation.

Polenka, cried Katerina Ivanovna, run to Sonia, make haste. If you
dont find her at home, leave word that her father has been run over
and that she is to come here at once... when she comes in. Run, Polenka!
there, put on the shawl.

Run your fastest! cried the little boy on the chair suddenly, after
which he relapsed into the same dumb rigidity, with round eyes, his
heels thrust forward and his toes spread out.

Meanwhile the room had become so full of people that you couldnt have
dropped a pin. The policemen left, all except one, who remained for a
time, trying to drive out the people who came in from the stairs. Almost
all Madame Lippevechsels lodgers had streamed in from the inner rooms
of the flat; at first they were squeezed together in the doorway, but
afterwards they overflowed into the room. Katerina Ivanovna flew into a
fury.

You might let him die in peace, at least, she shouted at the crowd,
is it a spectacle for you to gape at? With cigarettes! (Cough, cough,
cough!) You might as well keep your hats on.... And there is one in his
hat!... Get away! You should respect the dead, at least!

Her cough choked her--but her reproaches were not without result. They
evidently stood in some awe of Katerina Ivanovna. The lodgers, one after
another, squeezed back into the doorway with that strange inner feeling
of satisfaction which may be observed in the presence of a sudden
accident, even in those nearest and dearest to the victim, from which
no living man is exempt, even in spite of the sincerest sympathy and
compassion.

Voices outside were heard, however, speaking of the hospital and saying
that theyd no business to make a disturbance here.

No business to die! cried Katerina Ivanovna, and she was rushing to
the door to vent her wrath upon them, but in the doorway came face to
face with Madame Lippevechsel who had only just heard of the accident
and ran in to restore order. She was a particularly quarrelsome and
irresponsible German.

Ah, my God! she cried, clasping her hands, your husband drunken
horses have trampled! To the hospital with him! I am the landlady!

Amalia Ludwigovna, I beg you to recollect what you are saying,
 Katerina Ivanovna began haughtily (she always took a haughty tone with
the landlady that she might remember her place and even now could not
deny herself this satisfaction). Amalia Ludwigovna...

I have you once before told that you to call me Amalia Ludwigovna may
not dare; I am Amalia Ivanovna.

You are not Amalia Ivanovna, but Amalia Ludwigovna, and as I am not
one of your despicable flatterers like Mr. Lebeziatnikov, whos laughing
behind the door at this moment (a laugh and a cry of they are at it
again was in fact audible at the door) so I shall always call you
Amalia Ludwigovna, though I fail to understand why you dislike that
name. You can see for yourself what has happened to Semyon Zaharovitch;
he is dying. I beg you to close that door at once and to admit no one.
Let him at least die in peace! Or I warn you the Governor-General,
himself, shall be informed of your conduct to-morrow. The prince knew
me as a girl; he remembers Semyon Zaharovitch well and has often been
a benefactor to him. Everyone knows that Semyon Zaharovitch had many
friends and protectors, whom he abandoned himself from an honourable
pride, knowing his unhappy weakness, but now (she pointed to
Raskolnikov) a generous young man has come to our assistance, who has
wealth and connections and whom Semyon Zaharovitch has known from a
child. You may rest assured, Amalia Ludwigovna...

All this was uttered with extreme rapidity, getting quicker and quicker,
but a cough suddenly cut short Katerina Ivanovnas eloquence. At that
instant the dying man recovered consciousness and uttered a groan; she
ran to him. The injured man opened his eyes and without recognition or
understanding gazed at Raskolnikov who was bending over him. He drew
deep, slow, painful breaths; blood oozed at the corners of his mouth
and drops of perspiration came out on his forehead. Not recognising
Raskolnikov, he began looking round uneasily. Katerina Ivanovna looked
at him with a sad but stern face, and tears trickled from her eyes.

My God! His whole chest is crushed! How he is bleeding, she said
in despair. We must take off his clothes. Turn a little, Semyon
Zaharovitch, if you can, she cried to him.

Marmeladov recognised her.

A priest, he articulated huskily.

Katerina Ivanovna walked to the window, laid her head against the window
frame and exclaimed in despair:

Oh, cursed life!

A priest, the dying man said again after a moments silence.

Theyve gone for him, Katerina Ivanovna shouted to him, he obeyed her
shout and was silent. With sad and timid eyes he looked for her; she
returned and stood by his pillow. He seemed a little easier but not for
long.

Soon his eyes rested on little Lida, his favourite, who was shaking in
the corner, as though she were in a fit, and staring at him with her
wondering childish eyes.

A-ah, he signed towards her uneasily. He wanted to say something.

What now? cried Katerina Ivanovna.

Barefoot, barefoot! he muttered, indicating with frenzied eyes the
childs bare feet.

Be silent, Katerina Ivanovna cried irritably, you know why she is
barefooted.

Thank God, the doctor, exclaimed Raskolnikov, relieved.

The doctor came in, a precise little old man, a German, looking about
him mistrustfully; he went up to the sick man, took his pulse, carefully
felt his head and with the help of Katerina Ivanovna he unbuttoned the
blood-stained shirt, and bared the injured mans chest. It was gashed,
crushed and fractured, several ribs on the right side were broken.
On the left side, just over the heart, was a large, sinister-looking
yellowish-black bruise--a cruel kick from the horses hoof. The doctor
frowned. The policeman told him that he was caught in the wheel and
turned round with it for thirty yards on the road.

Its wonderful that he has recovered consciousness, the doctor
whispered softly to Raskolnikov.

What do you think of him? he asked.

He will die immediately.

Is there really no hope?

Not the faintest! He is at the last gasp.... His head is badly injured,
too... Hm... I could bleed him if you like, but... it would be useless.
He is bound to die within the next five or ten minutes.

Better bleed him then.

If you like.... But I warn you it will be perfectly useless.

At that moment other steps were heard; the crowd in the passage parted,
and the priest, a little, grey old man, appeared in the doorway bearing
the sacrament. A policeman had gone for him at the time of the accident.
The doctor changed places with him, exchanging glances with him.
Raskolnikov begged the doctor to remain a little while. He shrugged his
shoulders and remained.

All stepped back. The confession was soon over. The dying man probably
understood little; he could only utter indistinct broken sounds.
Katerina Ivanovna took little Lida, lifted the boy from the chair, knelt
down in the corner by the stove and made the children kneel in front of
her. The little girl was still trembling; but the boy, kneeling on his
little bare knees, lifted his hand rhythmically, crossing himself with
precision and bowed down, touching the floor with his forehead, which
seemed to afford him especial satisfaction. Katerina Ivanovna bit her
lips and held back her tears; she prayed, too, now and then pulling
straight the boys shirt, and managed to cover the girls bare shoulders
with a kerchief, which she took from the chest without rising from her
knees or ceasing to pray. Meanwhile the door from the inner rooms was
opened inquisitively again. In the passage the crowd of spectators from
all the flats on the staircase grew denser and denser, but they did not
venture beyond the threshold. A single candle-end lighted up the scene.

At that moment Polenka forced her way through the crowd at the door. She
came in panting from running so fast, took off her kerchief, looked for
her mother, went up to her and said, Shes coming, I met her in the
street. Her mother made her kneel beside her.

Timidly and noiselessly a young girl made her way through the crowd,
and strange was her appearance in that room, in the midst of want, rags,
death and despair. She, too, was in rags, her attire was all of
the cheapest, but decked out in gutter finery of a special stamp,
unmistakably betraying its shameful purpose. Sonia stopped short in the
doorway and looked about her bewildered, unconscious of everything.
She forgot her fourth-hand, gaudy silk dress, so unseemly here with
its ridiculous long train, and her immense crinoline that filled up the
whole doorway, and her light-coloured shoes, and the parasol she brought
with her, though it was no use at night, and the absurd round straw hat
with its flaring flame-coloured feather. Under this rakishly-tilted hat
was a pale, frightened little face with lips parted and eyes staring in
terror. Sonia was a small thin girl of eighteen with fair hair, rather
pretty, with wonderful blue eyes. She looked intently at the bed and the
priest; she too was out of breath with running. At last whispers, some
words in the crowd probably, reached her. She looked down and took a
step forward into the room, still keeping close to the door.

The service was over. Katerina Ivanovna went up to her husband again.
The priest stepped back and turned to say a few words of admonition and
consolation to Katerina Ivanovna on leaving.

What am I to do with these? she interrupted sharply and irritably,
pointing to the little ones.

God is merciful; look to the Most High for succour, the priest began.

Ach! He is merciful, but not to us.

Thats a sin, a sin, madam, observed the priest, shaking his head.

And isnt that a sin? cried Katerina Ivanovna, pointing to the dying
man.

Perhaps those who have involuntarily caused the accident will agree to
compensate you, at least for the loss of his earnings.

You dont understand! cried Katerina Ivanovna angrily waving her hand.
And why should they compensate me? Why, he was drunk and threw himself
under the horses! What earnings? He brought us in nothing but misery.
He drank everything away, the drunkard! He robbed us to get drink, he
wasted their lives and mine for drink! And thank God hes dying! One
less to keep!

You must forgive in the hour of death, thats a sin, madam, such
feelings are a great sin.

Katerina Ivanovna was busy with the dying man; she was giving him water,
wiping the blood and sweat from his head, setting his pillow straight,
and had only turned now and then for a moment to address the priest. Now
she flew at him almost in a frenzy.

Ah, father! Thats words and only words! Forgive! If hed not been run
over, hed have come home to-day drunk and his only shirt dirty and
in rags and hed have fallen asleep like a log, and I should have been
sousing and rinsing till daybreak, washing his rags and the childrens
and then drying them by the window and as soon as it was daylight I
should have been darning them. Thats how I spend my nights!... Whats
the use of talking of forgiveness! I have forgiven as it is!

A terrible hollow cough interrupted her words. She put her handkerchief
to her lips and showed it to the priest, pressing her other hand to her
aching chest. The handkerchief was covered with blood. The priest bowed
his head and said nothing.

Marmeladov was in the last agony; he did not take his eyes off the face
of Katerina Ivanovna, who was bending over him again. He kept trying
to say something to her; he began moving his tongue with difficulty and
articulating indistinctly, but Katerina Ivanovna, understanding that he
wanted to ask her forgiveness, called peremptorily to him:

Be silent! No need! I know what you want to say! And the sick man
was silent, but at the same instant his wandering eyes strayed to the
doorway and he saw Sonia.

Till then he had not noticed her: she was standing in the shadow in a
corner.

Whos that? Whos that? he said suddenly in a thick gasping voice,
in agitation, turning his eyes in horror towards the door where his
daughter was standing, and trying to sit up.

Lie down! Lie do-own! cried Katerina Ivanovna.

With unnatural strength he had succeeded in propping himself on his
elbow. He looked wildly and fixedly for some time on his daughter, as
though not recognising her. He had never seen her before in such attire.
Suddenly he recognised her, crushed and ashamed in her humiliation and
gaudy finery, meekly awaiting her turn to say good-bye to her dying
father. His face showed intense suffering.

Sonia! Daughter! Forgive! he cried, and he tried to hold out his hand
to her, but losing his balance, he fell off the sofa, face downwards on
the floor. They rushed to pick him up, they put him on the sofa; but he
was dying. Sonia with a faint cry ran up, embraced him and remained so
without moving. He died in her arms.

Hes got what he wanted, Katerina Ivanovna cried, seeing her husbands
dead body. Well, whats to be done now? How am I to bury him! What can
I give them to-morrow to eat?

Raskolnikov went up to Katerina Ivanovna.

Katerina Ivanovna, he began, last week your husband told me all his
life and circumstances.... Believe me, he spoke of you with passionate
reverence. From that evening, when I learnt how devoted he was to you
all and how he loved and respected you especially, Katerina Ivanovna,
in spite of his unfortunate weakness, from that evening we became
friends.... Allow me now... to do something... to repay my debt to my
dead friend. Here are twenty roubles, I think--and if that can be of any
assistance to you, then... I... in short, I will come again, I will
be sure to come again... I shall, perhaps, come again to-morrow....
Good-bye!

And he went quickly out of the room, squeezing his way through the crowd
to the stairs. But in the crowd he suddenly jostled against Nikodim
Fomitch, who had heard of the accident and had come to give instructions
in person. They had not met since the scene at the police station, but
Nikodim Fomitch knew him instantly.

Ah, is that you? he asked him.

Hes dead, answered Raskolnikov. The doctor and the priest have been,
all as it should have been. Dont worry the poor woman too much, she is
in consumption as it is. Try and cheer her up, if possible... you are a
kind-hearted man, I know... he added with a smile, looking straight in
his face.

But you are spattered with blood, observed Nikodim Fomitch, noticing
in the lamplight some fresh stains on Raskolnikovs waistcoat.

Yes... Im covered with blood, Raskolnikov said with a peculiar air;
then he smiled, nodded and went downstairs.

He walked down slowly and deliberately, feverish but not conscious
of it, entirely absorbed in a new overwhelming sensation of life and
strength that surged up suddenly within him. This sensation might be
compared to that of a man condemned to death who has suddenly been
pardoned. Halfway down the staircase he was overtaken by the priest on
his way home; Raskolnikov let him pass, exchanging a silent greeting
with him. He was just descending the last steps when he heard rapid
footsteps behind him. Someone overtook him; it was Polenka. She was
running after him, calling Wait! wait!

He turned round. She was at the bottom of the staircase and stopped
short a step above him. A dim light came in from the yard. Raskolnikov
could distinguish the childs thin but pretty little face, looking at
him with a bright childish smile. She had run after him with a message
which she was evidently glad to give.

Tell me, what is your name?... and where do you live? she said
hurriedly in a breathless voice.

He laid both hands on her shoulders and looked at her with a sort of
rapture. It was such a joy to him to look at her, he could not have said
why.

Who sent you?

Sister Sonia sent me, answered the girl, smiling still more brightly.

I knew it was sister Sonia sent you.

Mamma sent me, too... when sister Sonia was sending me, mamma came up,
too, and said Run fast, Polenka.

Do you love sister Sonia?

I love her more than anyone, Polenka answered with a peculiar
earnestness, and her smile became graver.

And will you love me?

By way of answer he saw the little girls face approaching him, her full
lips navely held out to kiss him. Suddenly her arms as thin as sticks
held him tightly, her head rested on his shoulder and the little girl
wept softly, pressing her face against him.

I am sorry for father, she said a moment later, raising her
tear-stained face and brushing away the tears with her hands. Its
nothing but misfortunes now, she added suddenly with that peculiarly
sedate air which children try hard to assume when they want to speak
like grown-up people.

Did your father love you?

He loved Lida most, she went on very seriously without a smile,
exactly like grown-up people, he loved her because she is little and
because she is ill, too. And he always used to bring her presents. But
he taught us to read and me grammar and scripture, too, she added with
dignity. And mother never used to say anything, but we knew that she
liked it and father knew it, too. And mother wants to teach me French,
for its time my education began.

And do you know your prayers?

Of course, we do! We knew them long ago. I say my prayers to myself
as I am a big girl now, but Kolya and Lida say them aloud with mother.
First they repeat the Ave Maria and then another prayer: Lord,
forgive and bless sister Sonia, and then another, Lord, forgive and
bless our second father. For our elder father is dead and this is
another one, but we do pray for the other as well.

Polenka, my name is Rodion. Pray sometimes for me, too. And Thy
servant Rodion, nothing more.

Ill pray for you all the rest of my life, the little girl declared
hotly, and suddenly smiling again she rushed at him and hugged him
warmly once more.

Raskolnikov told her his name and address and promised to be sure to
come next day. The child went away quite enchanted with him. It was past
ten when he came out into the street. In five minutes he was standing on
the bridge at the spot where the woman had jumped in.

Enough, he pronounced resolutely and triumphantly. Ive done with
fancies, imaginary terrors and phantoms! Life is real! havent I lived
just now? My life has not yet died with that old woman! The Kingdom of
Heaven to her--and now enough, madam, leave me in peace! Now for the
reign of reason and light... and of will, and of strength... and now
we will see! We will try our strength! he added defiantly, as though
challenging some power of darkness. And I was ready to consent to live
in a square of space!

I am very weak at this moment, but... I believe my illness is all over.
I knew it would be over when I went out. By the way, Potchinkovs house
is only a few steps away. I certainly must go to Razumihin even if
it were not close by... let him win his bet! Let us give him some
satisfaction, too--no matter! Strength, strength is what one wants, you
can get nothing without it, and strength must be won by strength--thats
what they dont know, he added proudly and self-confidently and
he walked with flagging footsteps from the bridge. Pride and
self-confidence grew continually stronger in him; he was becoming
a different man every moment. What was it had happened to work this
revolution in him? He did not know himself; like a man catching at a
straw, he suddenly felt that he, too, could live, that there was still
life for him, that his life had not died with the old woman. Perhaps he
was in too great a hurry with his conclusions, but he did not think of
that.

But I did ask her to remember Thy servant Rodion in her prayers, the
idea struck him. Well, that was... in case of emergency, he added and
laughed himself at his boyish sally. He was in the best of spirits.

He easily found Razumihin; the new lodger was already known at
Potchinkovs and the porter at once showed him the way. Half-way
upstairs he could hear the noise and animated conversation of a big
gathering of people. The door was wide open on the stairs; he could
hear exclamations and discussion. Razumihins room was fairly large; the
company consisted of fifteen people. Raskolnikov stopped in the entry,
where two of the landladys servants were busy behind a screen with two
samovars, bottles, plates and dishes of pie and savouries, brought up
from the landladys kitchen. Raskolnikov sent in for Razumihin. He ran
out delighted. At the first glance it was apparent that he had had a
great deal to drink and, though no amount of liquor made Razumihin quite
drunk, this time he was perceptibly affected by it.

Listen, Raskolnikov hastened to say, Ive only just come to tell you
youve won your bet and that no one really knows what may not happen to
him. I cant come in; I am so weak that I shall fall down directly. And
so good evening and good-bye! Come and see me to-morrow.

Do you know what? Ill see you home. If you say youre weak yourself,
you must...

And your visitors? Who is the curly-headed one who has just peeped
out?

He? Goodness only knows! Some friend of uncles, I expect, or perhaps
he has come without being invited... Ill leave uncle with them, he
is an invaluable person, pity I cant introduce you to him now. But
confound them all now! They wont notice me, and I need a little fresh
air, for youve come just in the nick of time--another two minutes and I
should have come to blows! They are talking such a lot of wild stuff...
you simply cant imagine what men will say! Though why shouldnt you
imagine? Dont we talk nonsense ourselves? And let them... thats the
way to learn not to!... Wait a minute, Ill fetch Zossimov.

Zossimov pounced upon Raskolnikov almost greedily; he showed a special
interest in him; soon his face brightened.

You must go to bed at once, he pronounced, examining the patient as
far as he could, and take something for the night. Will you take it? I
got it ready some time ago... a powder.

Two, if you like, answered Raskolnikov. The powder was taken at once.

Its a good thing you are taking him home, observed Zossimov to
Razumihin--we shall see how he is to-morrow, to-day hes not at all
amiss--a considerable change since the afternoon. Live and learn...

Do you know what Zossimov whispered to me when we were coming out?
 Razumihin blurted out, as soon as they were in the street. I wont tell
you everything, brother, because they are such fools. Zossimov told me
to talk freely to you on the way and get you to talk freely to me, and
afterwards I am to tell him about it, for hes got a notion in his head
that you are... mad or close on it. Only fancy! In the first place,
youve three times the brains he has; in the second, if you are not mad,
you neednt care a hang that he has got such a wild idea; and thirdly,
that piece of beef whose specialty is surgery has gone mad on mental
diseases, and whats brought him to this conclusion about you was your
conversation to-day with Zametov.

Zametov told you all about it?

Yes, and he did well. Now I understand what it all means and so does
Zametov.... Well, the fact is, Rodya... the point is... I am a little
drunk now.... But thats... no matter... the point is that this
idea... you understand? was just being hatched in their brains... you
understand? That is, no one ventured to say it aloud, because the idea
is too absurd and especially since the arrest of that painter, that
bubbles burst and gone for ever. But why are they such fools? I gave
Zametov a bit of a thrashing at the time--thats between ourselves,
brother; please dont let out a hint that you know of it; Ive noticed
he is a ticklish subject; it was at Luise Ivanovnas. But to-day, to-day
its all cleared up. That Ilya Petrovitch is at the bottom of it! He
took advantage of your fainting at the police station, but he is ashamed
of it himself now; I know that...

Raskolnikov listened greedily. Razumihin was drunk enough to talk too
freely.

I fainted then because it was so close and the smell of paint, said
Raskolnikov.

No need to explain that! And it wasnt the paint only: the fever had
been coming on for a month; Zossimov testifies to that! But how crushed
that boy is now, you wouldnt believe! I am not worth his little
finger, he says. Yours, he means. He has good feelings at times,
brother. But the lesson, the lesson you gave him to-day in the Palais
de Cristal, that was too good for anything! You frightened him at first,
you know, he nearly went into convulsions! You almost convinced
him again of the truth of all that hideous nonsense, and then you
suddenly--put out your tongue at him: There now, what do you make of
it? It was perfect! He is crushed, annihilated now! It was masterly, by
Jove, its what they deserve! Ah, that I wasnt there! He was hoping to
see you awfully. Porfiry, too, wants to make your acquaintance...

Ah!... he too... but why did they put me down as mad?

Oh, not mad. I must have said too much, brother.... What struck him,
you see, was that only that subject seemed to interest you; now its
clear why it did interest you; knowing all the circumstances... and
how that irritated you and worked in with your illness... I am a little
drunk, brother, only, confound him, he has some idea of his own... I
tell you, hes mad on mental diseases. But dont you mind him...

For half a minute both were silent.

Listen, Razumihin, began Raskolnikov, I want to tell you plainly:
Ive just been at a death-bed, a clerk who died... I gave them all my
money... and besides Ive just been kissed by someone who, if I had
killed anyone, would just the same... in fact I saw someone else
there... with a flame-coloured feather... but I am talking nonsense; I
am very weak, support me... we shall be at the stairs directly...

Whats the matter? Whats the matter with you? Razumihin asked
anxiously.

I am a little giddy, but thats not the point, I am so sad, so sad...
like a woman. Look, whats that? Look, look!

What is it?

Dont you see? A light in my room, you see? Through the crack...

They were already at the foot of the last flight of stairs, at the level
of the landladys door, and they could, as a fact, see from below that
there was a light in Raskolnikovs garret.

Queer! Nastasya, perhaps, observed Razumihin.

She is never in my room at this time and she must be in bed long ago,
but... I dont care! Good-bye!

What do you mean? I am coming with you, well come in together!

I know we are going in together, but I want to shake hands here and say
good-bye to you here. So give me your hand, good-bye!

Whats the matter with you, Rodya?

Nothing... come along... you shall be witness.

They began mounting the stairs, and the idea struck Razumihin that
perhaps Zossimov might be right after all. Ah, Ive upset him with my
chatter! he muttered to himself.

When they reached the door they heard voices in the room.

What is it? cried Razumihin. Raskolnikov was the first to open the
door; he flung it wide and stood still in the doorway, dumbfoundered.

His mother and sister were sitting on his sofa and had been waiting an
hour and a half for him. Why had he never expected, never thought of
them, though the news that they had started, were on their way and would
arrive immediately, had been repeated to him only that day? They had
spent that hour and a half plying Nastasya with questions. She was
standing before them and had told them everything by now. They were
beside themselves with alarm when they heard of his running away
 to-day, ill and, as they understood from her story, delirious! Good
Heavens, what had become of him? Both had been weeping, both had been
in anguish for that hour and a half.

A cry of joy, of ecstasy, greeted Raskolnikovs entrance. Both rushed to
him. But he stood like one dead; a sudden intolerable sensation struck
him like a thunderbolt. He did not lift his arms to embrace them, he
could not. His mother and sister clasped him in their arms, kissed him,
laughed and cried. He took a step, tottered and fell to the ground,
fainting.

Anxiety, cries of horror, moans... Razumihin who was standing in the
doorway flew into the room, seized the sick man in his strong arms and
in a moment had him on the sofa.

Its nothing, nothing! he cried to the mother and sister--its only a
faint, a mere trifle! Only just now the doctor said he was much better,
that he is perfectly well! Water! See, he is coming to himself, he is
all right again!

And seizing Dounia by the arm so that he almost dislocated it, he made
her bend down to see that he is all right again. The mother and sister
looked on him with emotion and gratitude, as their Providence. They
had heard already from Nastasya all that had been done for their Rodya
during his illness, by this very competent young man, as Pulcheria
Alexandrovna Raskolnikov called him that evening in conversation with
Dounia.




PART III



