CHAPTER V

Raskolnikov was already entering the room. He came in looking as though
he had the utmost difficulty not to burst out laughing again. Behind him
Razumihin strode in gawky and awkward, shamefaced and red as a peony,
with an utterly crestfallen and ferocious expression. His face and
whole figure really were ridiculous at that moment and amply justified
Raskolnikovs laughter. Raskolnikov, not waiting for an introduction,
bowed to Porfiry Petrovitch, who stood in the middle of the room
looking inquiringly at them. He held out his hand and shook hands, still
apparently making desperate efforts to subdue his mirth and utter a few
words to introduce himself. But he had no sooner succeeded in assuming
a serious air and muttering something when he suddenly glanced again as
though accidentally at Razumihin, and could no longer control himself:
his stifled laughter broke out the more irresistibly the more he tried
to restrain it. The extraordinary ferocity with which Razumihin received
this spontaneous mirth gave the whole scene the appearance of most
genuine fun and naturalness. Razumihin strengthened this impression as
though on purpose.

Fool! You fiend, he roared, waving his arm which at once struck a
little round table with an empty tea-glass on it. Everything was sent
flying and crashing.

But why break chairs, gentlemen? You know its a loss to the Crown,
 Porfiry Petrovitch quoted gaily.

Raskolnikov was still laughing, with his hand in Porfiry Petrovitchs,
but anxious not to overdo it, awaited the right moment to put a natural
end to it. Razumihin, completely put to confusion by upsetting the table
and smashing the glass, gazed gloomily at the fragments, cursed and
turned sharply to the window where he stood looking out with his back
to the company with a fiercely scowling countenance, seeing nothing.
Porfiry Petrovitch laughed and was ready to go on laughing, but
obviously looked for explanations. Zametov had been sitting in the
corner, but he rose at the visitors entrance and was standing in
expectation with a smile on his lips, though he looked with surprise and
even it seemed incredulity at the whole scene and at Raskolnikov with a
certain embarrassment. Zametovs unexpected presence struck Raskolnikov
unpleasantly.

Ive got to think of that, he thought. Excuse me, please, he began,
affecting extreme embarrassment. Raskolnikov.

Not at all, very pleasant to see you... and how pleasantly youve come
in.... Why, wont he even say good-morning? Porfiry Petrovitch nodded
at Razumihin.

Upon my honour I dont know why he is in such a rage with me. I only
told him as we came along that he was like Romeo... and proved it. And
that was all, I think!

Pig! ejaculated Razumihin, without turning round.

There must have been very grave grounds for it, if he is so furious at
the word, Porfiry laughed.

Oh, you sharp lawyer!... Damn you all! snapped Razumihin, and suddenly
bursting out laughing himself, he went up to Porfiry with a more
cheerful face as though nothing had happened. Thatll do! We are
all fools. To come to business. This is my friend Rodion Romanovitch
Raskolnikov; in the first place he has heard of you and wants to make
your acquaintance, and secondly, he has a little matter of business with
you. Bah! Zametov, what brought you here? Have you met before? Have you
known each other long?

What does this mean? thought Raskolnikov uneasily.

Zametov seemed taken aback, but not very much so.

Why, it was at your rooms we met yesterday, he said easily.

Then I have been spared the trouble. All last week he was begging me
to introduce him to you. Porfiry and you have sniffed each other out
without me. Where is your tobacco?

Porfiry Petrovitch was wearing a dressing-gown, very clean linen, and
trodden-down slippers. He was a man of about five and thirty, short,
stout even to corpulence, and clean shaven. He wore his hair cut short
and had a large round head, particularly prominent at the back. His
soft, round, rather snub-nosed face was of a sickly yellowish colour,
but had a vigorous and rather ironical expression. It would have been
good-natured except for a look in the eyes, which shone with a watery,
mawkish light under almost white, blinking eyelashes. The expression
of those eyes was strangely out of keeping with his somewhat womanish
figure, and gave it something far more serious than could be guessed at
first sight.

As soon as Porfiry Petrovitch heard that his visitor had a little matter
of business with him, he begged him to sit down on the sofa and sat down
himself on the other end, waiting for him to explain his business, with
that careful and over-serious attention which is at once oppressive and
embarrassing, especially to a stranger, and especially if what you are
discussing is in your opinion of far too little importance for such
exceptional solemnity. But in brief and coherent phrases Raskolnikov
explained his business clearly and exactly, and was so well satisfied
with himself that he even succeeded in taking a good look at Porfiry.
Porfiry Petrovitch did not once take his eyes off him. Razumihin,
sitting opposite at the same table, listened warmly and impatiently,
looking from one to the other every moment with rather excessive
interest.

Fool, Raskolnikov swore to himself.

You have to give information to the police, Porfiry replied, with a
most businesslike air, that having learnt of this incident, that is of
the murder, you beg to inform the lawyer in charge of the case that such
and such things belong to you, and that you desire to redeem them...
or... but they will write to you.

Thats just the point, that at the present moment, Raskolnikov tried
his utmost to feign embarrassment, I am not quite in funds... and
even this trifling sum is beyond me... I only wanted, you see, for
the present to declare that the things are mine, and that when I have
money....

Thats no matter, answered Porfiry Petrovitch, receiving his
explanation of his pecuniary position coldly, but you can, if you
prefer, write straight to me, to say, that having been informed of the
matter, and claiming such and such as your property, you beg...

On an ordinary sheet of paper? Raskolnikov interrupted eagerly, again
interested in the financial side of the question.

Oh, the most ordinary, and suddenly Porfiry Petrovitch looked with
obvious irony at him, screwing up his eyes and, as it were, winking at
him. But perhaps it was Raskolnikovs fancy, for it all lasted but a
moment. There was certainly something of the sort, Raskolnikov could
have sworn he winked at him, goodness knows why.

He knows, flashed through his mind like lightning.

Forgive my troubling you about such trifles, he went on, a little
disconcerted, the things are only worth five roubles, but I prize them
particularly for the sake of those from whom they came to me, and I must
confess that I was alarmed when I heard...

Thats why you were so much struck when I mentioned to Zossimov that
Porfiry was inquiring for everyone who had pledges! Razumihin put in
with obvious intention.

This was really unbearable. Raskolnikov could not help glancing at him
with a flash of vindictive anger in his black eyes, but immediately
recollected himself.

You seem to be jeering at me, brother? he said to him, with a
well-feigned irritability. I dare say I do seem to you absurdly anxious
about such trash; but you mustnt think me selfish or grasping for that,
and these two things may be anything but trash in my eyes. I told you
just now that the silver watch, though its not worth a cent, is the
only thing left us of my fathers. You may laugh at me, but my mother is
here, he turned suddenly to Porfiry, and if she knew, he turned again
hurriedly to Razumihin, carefully making his voice tremble, that the
watch was lost, she would be in despair! You know what women are!

Not a bit of it! I didnt mean that at all! Quite the contrary!
 shouted Razumihin distressed.

Was it right? Was it natural? Did I overdo it? Raskolnikov asked
himself in a tremor. Why did I say that about women?

Oh, your mother is with you? Porfiry Petrovitch inquired.

Yes.

When did she come?

Last night.

Porfiry paused as though reflecting.

Your things would not in any case be lost, he went on calmly and
coldly. I have been expecting you here for some time.

And as though that was a matter of no importance, he carefully offered
the ash-tray to Razumihin, who was ruthlessly scattering cigarette ash
over the carpet. Raskolnikov shuddered, but Porfiry did not seem to be
looking at him, and was still concerned with Razumihins cigarette.

What? Expecting him? Why, did you know that he had pledges _there_?
 cried Razumihin.

Porfiry Petrovitch addressed himself to Raskolnikov.

Your things, the ring and the watch, were wrapped up together, and on
the paper your name was legibly written in pencil, together with the
date on which you left them with her...

How observant you are! Raskolnikov smiled awkwardly, doing his very
utmost to look him straight in the face, but he failed, and suddenly
added:

I say that because I suppose there were a great many pledges... that it
must be difficult to remember them all.... But you remember them all so
clearly, and... and...

Stupid! Feeble! he thought. Why did I add that?

But we know all who had pledges, and you are the only one who hasnt
come forward, Porfiry answered with hardly perceptible irony.

I havent been quite well.

I heard that too. I heard, indeed, that you were in great distress
about something. You look pale still.

I am not pale at all.... No, I am quite well, Raskolnikov snapped
out rudely and angrily, completely changing his tone. His anger was
mounting, he could not repress it. And in my anger I shall betray
myself, flashed through his mind again. Why are they torturing me?

Not quite well! Razumihin caught him up. What next! He was
unconscious and delirious all yesterday. Would you believe, Porfiry, as
soon as our backs were turned, he dressed, though he could hardly stand,
and gave us the slip and went off on a spree somewhere till midnight,
delirious all the time! Would you believe it! Extraordinary!

Really delirious? You dont say so! Porfiry shook his head in a
womanish way.

Nonsense! Dont you believe it! But you dont believe it anyway,
 Raskolnikov let slip in his anger. But Porfiry Petrovitch did not seem
to catch those strange words.

But how could you have gone out if you hadnt been delirious?
 Razumihin got hot suddenly. What did you go out for? What was the
object of it? And why on the sly? Were you in your senses when you did
it? Now that all danger is over I can speak plainly.

I was awfully sick of them yesterday. Raskolnikov addressed Porfiry
suddenly with a smile of insolent defiance, I ran away from them to
take lodgings where they wouldnt find me, and took a lot of money with
me. Mr. Zametov there saw it. I say, Mr. Zametov, was I sensible or
delirious yesterday; settle our dispute.

He could have strangled Zametov at that moment, so hateful were his
expression and his silence to him.

In my opinion you talked sensibly and even artfully, but you were
extremely irritable, Zametov pronounced dryly.

And Nikodim Fomitch was telling me to-day, put in Porfiry Petrovitch,
that he met you very late last night in the lodging of a man who had
been run over.

And there, said Razumihin, werent you mad then? You gave your last
penny to the widow for the funeral. If you wanted to help, give fifteen
or twenty even, but keep three roubles for yourself at least, but he
flung away all the twenty-five at once!

Maybe I found a treasure somewhere and you know nothing of it? So
thats why I was liberal yesterday.... Mr. Zametov knows Ive found a
treasure! Excuse us, please, for disturbing you for half an hour
with such trivialities, he said, turning to Porfiry Petrovitch, with
trembling lips. We are boring you, arent we?

Oh no, quite the contrary, quite the contrary! If only you knew how you
interest me! Its interesting to look on and listen... and I am really
glad you have come forward at last.

But you might give us some tea! My throats dry, cried Razumihin.

Capital idea! Perhaps we will all keep you company. Wouldnt you
like... something more essential before tea?

Get along with you!

Porfiry Petrovitch went out to order tea.

Raskolnikovs thoughts were in a whirl. He was in terrible exasperation.

The worst of it is they dont disguise it; they dont care to stand on
ceremony! And how if you didnt know me at all, did you come to talk
to Nikodim Fomitch about me? So they dont care to hide that they are
tracking me like a pack of dogs. They simply spit in my face. He was
shaking with rage. Come, strike me openly, dont play with me like a
cat with a mouse. Its hardly civil, Porfiry Petrovitch, but perhaps I
wont allow it! I shall get up and throw the whole truth in your ugly
faces, and youll see how I despise you. He could hardly breathe.
And what if its only my fancy? What if I am mistaken, and through
inexperience I get angry and dont keep up my nasty part? Perhaps its
all unintentional. All their phrases are the usual ones, but there is
something about them.... It all might be said, but there is something.
Why did he say bluntly, With her? Why did Zametov add that I spoke
artfully? Why do they speak in that tone? Yes, the tone.... Razumihin
is sitting here, why does he see nothing? That innocent blockhead never
does see anything! Feverish again! Did Porfiry wink at me just now? Of
course its nonsense! What could he wink for? Are they trying to upset
my nerves or are they teasing me? Either its ill fancy or they know!
Even Zametov is rude.... Is Zametov rude? Zametov has changed his mind.
I foresaw he would change his mind! He is at home here, while its my
first visit. Porfiry does not consider him a visitor; sits with his back
to him. Theyre as thick as thieves, no doubt, over me! Not a doubt they
were talking about me before we came. Do they know about the flat? If
only theyd make haste! When I said that I ran away to take a flat he
let it pass.... I put that in cleverly about a flat, it may be of use
afterwards.... Delirious, indeed... ha-ha-ha! He knows all about last
night! He didnt know of my mothers arrival! The hag had written the
date on in pencil! You are wrong, you wont catch me! There are no
facts... its all supposition! You produce facts! The flat even isnt a
fact but delirium. I know what to say to them.... Do they know about the
flat? I wont go without finding out. What did I come for? But my being
angry now, maybe is a fact! Fool, how irritable I am! Perhaps thats
right; to play the invalid.... He is feeling me. He will try to catch
me. Why did I come?

All this flashed like lightning through his mind.

Porfiry Petrovitch returned quickly. He became suddenly more jovial.

Your party yesterday, brother, has left my head rather.... And I am out
of sorts altogether, he began in quite a different tone, laughing to
Razumihin.

Was it interesting? I left you yesterday at the most interesting point.
Who got the best of it?

Oh, no one, of course. They got on to everlasting questions, floated
off into space.

Only fancy, Rodya, what we got on to yesterday. Whether there is such a
thing as crime. I told you that we talked our heads off.

What is there strange? Its an everyday social question, Raskolnikov
answered casually.

The question wasnt put quite like that, observed Porfiry.

Not quite, thats true, Razumihin agreed at once, getting warm and
hurried as usual. Listen, Rodion, and tell us your opinion, I want to
hear it. I was fighting tooth and nail with them and wanted you to
help me. I told them you were coming.... It began with the socialist
doctrine. You know their doctrine; crime is a protest against the
abnormality of the social organisation and nothing more, and nothing
more; no other causes admitted!...

You are wrong there, cried Porfiry Petrovitch; he was noticeably
animated and kept laughing as he looked at Razumihin, which made him
more excited than ever.

Nothing is admitted, Razumihin interrupted with heat.

I am not wrong. Ill show you their pamphlets. Everything with them
is the influence of environment, and nothing else. Their favourite
phrase! From which it follows that, if society is normally organised,
all crime will cease at once, since there will be nothing to protest
against and all men will become righteous in one instant. Human nature
is not taken into account, it is excluded, its not supposed to exist!
They dont recognise that humanity, developing by a historical living
process, will become at last a normal society, but they believe that a
social system that has come out of some mathematical brain is going
to organise all humanity at once and make it just and sinless in an
instant, quicker than any living process! Thats why they instinctively
dislike history, nothing but ugliness and stupidity in it, and they
explain it all as stupidity! Thats why they so dislike the _living_
process of life; they dont want a _living soul_! The living soul
demands life, the soul wont obey the rules of mechanics, the soul is an
object of suspicion, the soul is retrograde! But what they want though
it smells of death and can be made of India-rubber, at least is not
alive, has no will, is servile and wont revolt! And it comes in the end
to their reducing everything to the building of walls and the planning
of rooms and passages in a phalanstery! The phalanstery is ready,
indeed, but your human nature is not ready for the phalanstery--it
wants life, it hasnt completed its vital process, its too soon for the
graveyard! You cant skip over nature by logic. Logic presupposes three
possibilities, but there are millions! Cut away a million, and reduce
it all to the question of comfort! Thats the easiest solution of the
problem! Its seductively clear and you musnt think about it. Thats
the great thing, you mustnt think! The whole secret of life in two
pages of print!

Now he is off, beating the drum! Catch hold of him, do! laughed
Porfiry. Can you imagine, he turned to Raskolnikov, six people
holding forth like that last night, in one room, with punch as a
preliminary! No, brother, you are wrong, environment accounts for a
great deal in crime; I can assure you of that.

Oh, I know it does, but just tell me: a man of forty violates a child
of ten; was it environment drove him to it?

Well, strictly speaking, it did, Porfiry observed with noteworthy
gravity; a crime of that nature may be very well ascribed to the
influence of environment.

Razumihin was almost in a frenzy. Oh, if you like, he roared. Ill
prove to you that your white eyelashes may very well be ascribed to the
Church of Ivan the Greats being two hundred and fifty feet high, and I
will prove it clearly, exactly, progressively, and even with a Liberal
tendency! I undertake to! Will you bet on it?

Done! Lets hear, please, how he will prove it!

He is always humbugging, confound him, cried Razumihin, jumping up and
gesticulating. Whats the use of talking to you? He does all that
on purpose; you dont know him, Rodion! He took their side yesterday,
simply to make fools of them. And the things he said yesterday! And they
were delighted! He can keep it up for a fortnight together. Last year he
persuaded us that he was going into a monastery: he stuck to it for two
months. Not long ago he took it into his head to declare he was going
to get married, that he had everything ready for the wedding. He ordered
new clothes indeed. We all began to congratulate him. There was no
bride, nothing, all pure fantasy!

Ah, you are wrong! I got the clothes before. It was the new clothes in
fact that made me think of taking you in.

Are you such a good dissembler? Raskolnikov asked carelessly.

You wouldnt have supposed it, eh? Wait a bit, I shall take you in,
too. Ha-ha-ha! No, Ill tell you the truth. All these questions about
crime, environment, children, recall to my mind an article of yours
which interested me at the time. On Crime... or something of the
sort, I forget the title, I read it with pleasure two months ago in the
_Periodical Review_.

My article? In the _Periodical Review_? Raskolnikov asked in
astonishment. I certainly did write an article upon a book six months
ago when I left the university, but I sent it to the _Weekly Review_.

But it came out in the _Periodical_.

And the _Weekly Review_ ceased to exist, so thats why it wasnt
printed at the time.

Thats true; but when it ceased to exist, the _Weekly Review_ was
amalgamated with the _Periodical_, and so your article appeared two
months ago in the latter. Didnt you know?

Raskolnikov had not known.

Why, you might get some money out of them for the article! What a
strange person you are! You lead such a solitary life that you know
nothing of matters that concern you directly. Its a fact, I assure
you.

Bravo, Rodya! I knew nothing about it either! cried Razumihin. Ill
run to-day to the reading-room and ask for the number. Two months ago?
What was the date? It doesnt matter though, I will find it. Think of
not telling us!

How did you find out that the article was mine? Its only signed with
an initial.

I only learnt it by chance, the other day. Through the editor; I know
him.... I was very much interested.

I analysed, if I remember, the psychology of a criminal before and
after the crime.

Yes, and you maintained that the perpetration of a crime is always
accompanied by illness. Very, very original, but... it was not that part
of your article that interested me so much, but an idea at the end of
the article which I regret to say you merely suggested without working
it out clearly. There is, if you recollect, a suggestion that there are
certain persons who can... that is, not precisely are able to, but have
a perfect right to commit breaches of morality and crimes, and that the
law is not for them.

Raskolnikov smiled at the exaggerated and intentional distortion of his
idea.

What? What do you mean? A right to crime? But not because of the
influence of environment? Razumihin inquired with some alarm even.

No, not exactly because of it, answered Porfiry. In his article all
men are divided into ordinary and extraordinary. Ordinary men have
to live in submission, have no right to transgress the law, because,
dont you see, they are ordinary. But extraordinary men have a right to
commit any crime and to transgress the law in any way, just because they
are extraordinary. That was your idea, if I am not mistaken?

What do you mean? That cant be right? Razumihin muttered in
bewilderment.

Raskolnikov smiled again. He saw the point at once, and knew where they
wanted to drive him. He decided to take up the challenge.

That wasnt quite my contention, he began simply and modestly. Yet
I admit that you have stated it almost correctly; perhaps, if you like,
perfectly so. (It almost gave him pleasure to admit this.) The only
difference is that I dont contend that extraordinary people are always
bound to commit breaches of morals, as you call it. In fact, I doubt
whether such an argument could be published. I simply hinted that an
extraordinary man has the right... that is not an official right, but
an inner right to decide in his own conscience to overstep... certain
obstacles, and only in case it is essential for the practical fulfilment
of his idea (sometimes, perhaps, of benefit to the whole of humanity).
You say that my article isnt definite; I am ready to make it as clear
as I can. Perhaps I am right in thinking you want me to; very well. I
maintain that if the discoveries of Kepler and Newton could not have
been made known except by sacrificing the lives of one, a dozen, a
hundred, or more men, Newton would have had the right, would indeed have
been in duty-bound... to _eliminate_ the dozen or the hundred men for
the sake of making his discoveries known to the whole of humanity. But
it does not follow from that that Newton had a right to murder people
right and left and to steal every day in the market. Then, I remember, I
maintain in my article that all... well, legislators and leaders of men,
such as Lycurgus, Solon, Mahomet, Napoleon, and so on, were all without
exception criminals, from the very fact that, making a new law, they
transgressed the ancient one, handed down from their ancestors and held
sacred by the people, and they did not stop short at bloodshed either,
if that bloodshed--often of innocent persons fighting bravely in defence
of ancient law--were of use to their cause. Its remarkable, in fact,
that the majority, indeed, of these benefactors and leaders of humanity
were guilty of terrible carnage. In short, I maintain that all great men
or even men a little out of the common, that is to say capable of giving
some new word, must from their very nature be criminals--more or less,
of course. Otherwise its hard for them to get out of the common rut;
and to remain in the common rut is what they cant submit to, from their
very nature again, and to my mind they ought not, indeed, to submit to
it. You see that there is nothing particularly new in all that. The
same thing has been printed and read a thousand times before. As for my
division of people into ordinary and extraordinary, I acknowledge that
its somewhat arbitrary, but I dont insist upon exact numbers. I only
believe in my leading idea that men are _in general_ divided by a law
of nature into two categories, inferior (ordinary), that is, so to say,
material that serves only to reproduce its kind, and men who have
the gift or the talent to utter _a new word_. There are, of course,
innumerable sub-divisions, but the distinguishing features of both
categories are fairly well marked. The first category, generally
speaking, are men conservative in temperament and law-abiding; they live
under control and love to be controlled. To my thinking it is their duty
to be controlled, because thats their vocation, and there is nothing
humiliating in it for them. The second category all transgress the
law; they are destroyers or disposed to destruction according to their
capacities. The crimes of these men are of course relative and varied;
for the most part they seek in very varied ways the destruction of the
present for the sake of the better. But if such a one is forced for the
sake of his idea to step over a corpse or wade through blood, he can, I
maintain, find within himself, in his conscience, a sanction for wading
through blood--that depends on the idea and its dimensions, note that.
Its only in that sense I speak of their right to crime in my article
(you remember it began with the legal question). Theres no need for
such anxiety, however; the masses will scarcely ever admit this right,
they punish them or hang them (more or less), and in doing so fulfil
quite justly their conservative vocation. But the same masses set these
criminals on a pedestal in the next generation and worship them (more or
less). The first category is always the man of the present, the second
the man of the future. The first preserve the world and people it, the
second move the world and lead it to its goal. Each class has an equal
right to exist. In fact, all have equal rights with me--and _vive la
guerre ternelle_--till the New Jerusalem, of course!

Then you believe in the New Jerusalem, do you?

I do, Raskolnikov answered firmly; as he said these words and during
the whole preceding tirade he kept his eyes on one spot on the carpet.

And... and do you believe in God? Excuse my curiosity.

I do, repeated Raskolnikov, raising his eyes to Porfiry.

And... do you believe in Lazarus rising from the dead?

I... I do. Why do you ask all this?

You believe it literally?

Literally.

You dont say so.... I asked from curiosity. Excuse me. But let us
go back to the question; they are not always executed. Some, on the
contrary...

Triumph in their lifetime? Oh, yes, some attain their ends in this
life, and then...

They begin executing other people?

If its necessary; indeed, for the most part they do. Your remark is
very witty.

Thank you. But tell me this: how do you distinguish those extraordinary
people from the ordinary ones? Are there signs at their birth? I feel
there ought to be more exactitude, more external definition. Excuse the
natural anxiety of a practical law-abiding citizen, but couldnt they
adopt a special uniform, for instance, couldnt they wear something, be
branded in some way? For you know if confusion arises and a member of
one category imagines that he belongs to the other, begins to eliminate
obstacles as you so happily expressed it, then...

Oh, that very often happens! That remark is wittier than the other.

Thank you.

No reason to; but take note that the mistake can only arise in
the first category, that is among the ordinary people (as I perhaps
unfortunately called them). In spite of their predisposition to
obedience very many of them, through a playfulness of nature, sometimes
vouchsafed even to the cow, like to imagine themselves advanced people,
destroyers, and to push themselves into the new movement, and
this quite sincerely. Meanwhile the really _new_ people are very often
unobserved by them, or even despised as reactionaries of grovelling
tendencies. But I dont think there is any considerable danger here,
and you really need not be uneasy for they never go very far. Of course,
they might have a thrashing sometimes for letting their fancy run away
with them and to teach them their place, but no more; in fact, even
this isnt necessary as they castigate themselves, for they are very
conscientious: some perform this service for one another and others
chastise themselves with their own hands.... They will impose various
public acts of penitence upon themselves with a beautiful and edifying
effect; in fact youve nothing to be uneasy about.... Its a law of
nature.

Well, you have certainly set my mind more at rest on that score; but
theres another thing worries me. Tell me, please, are there many people
who have the right to kill others, these extraordinary people? I am
ready to bow down to them, of course, but you must admit its alarming
if there are a great many of them, eh?

Oh, you neednt worry about that either, Raskolnikov went on in the
same tone. People with new ideas, people with the faintest capacity for
saying something _new_, are extremely few in number, extraordinarily
so in fact. One thing only is clear, that the appearance of all these
grades and sub-divisions of men must follow with unfailing regularity
some law of nature. That law, of course, is unknown at present, but I am
convinced that it exists, and one day may become known. The vast mass of
mankind is mere material, and only exists in order by some great effort,
by some mysterious process, by means of some crossing of races and
stocks, to bring into the world at last perhaps one man out of a
thousand with a spark of independence. One in ten thousand perhaps--I
speak roughly, approximately--is born with some independence, and with
still greater independence one in a hundred thousand. The man of genius
is one of millions, and the great geniuses, the crown of humanity,
appear on earth perhaps one in many thousand millions. In fact I have
not peeped into the retort in which all this takes place. But there
certainly is and must be a definite law, it cannot be a matter of
chance.

Why, are you both joking? Razumihin cried at last. There you sit,
making fun of one another. Are you serious, Rodya?

Raskolnikov raised his pale and almost mournful face and made no reply.
And the unconcealed, persistent, nervous, and _discourteous_ sarcasm of
Porfiry seemed strange to Razumihin beside that quiet and mournful face.

Well, brother, if you are really serious... You are right, of course,
in saying that its not new, that its like what weve read and heard a
thousand times already; but what is really original in all this, and is
exclusively your own, to my horror, is that you sanction bloodshed
_in the name of conscience_, and, excuse my saying so, with such
fanaticism.... That, I take it, is the point of your article. But that
sanction of bloodshed _by conscience_ is to my mind... more terrible
than the official, legal sanction of bloodshed....

You are quite right, it is more terrible, Porfiry agreed.

Yes, you must have exaggerated! There is some mistake, I shall read it.
You cant think that! I shall read it.

All that is not in the article, theres only a hint of it, said
Raskolnikov.

Yes, yes. Porfiry couldnt sit still. Your attitude to crime is
pretty clear to me now, but... excuse me for my impertinence (I am
really ashamed to be worrying you like this), you see, youve removed
my anxiety as to the two grades getting mixed, but... there are various
practical possibilities that make me uneasy! What if some man or youth
imagines that he is a Lycurgus or Mahomet--a future one of course--and
suppose he begins to remove all obstacles.... He has some great
enterprise before him and needs money for it... and tries to get it...
do you see?

Zametov gave a sudden guffaw in his corner. Raskolnikov did not even
raise his eyes to him.

I must admit, he went on calmly, that such cases certainly must
arise. The vain and foolish are particularly apt to fall into that
snare; young people especially.

Yes, you see. Well then?

What then? Raskolnikov smiled in reply; thats not my fault. So it is
and so it always will be. He said just now (he nodded at Razumihin)
that I sanction bloodshed. Society is too well protected by prisons,
banishment, criminal investigators, penal servitude. Theres no need to
be uneasy. You have but to catch the thief.

And what if we do catch him?

Then he gets what he deserves.

You are certainly logical. But what of his conscience?

Why do you care about that?

Simply from humanity.

If he has a conscience he will suffer for his mistake. That will be his
punishment--as well as the prison.

But the real geniuses, asked Razumihin frowning, those who have
the right to murder? Oughtnt they to suffer at all even for the blood
theyve shed?

Why the word _ought_? Its not a matter of permission or prohibition.
He will suffer if he is sorry for his victim. Pain and suffering are
always inevitable for a large intelligence and a deep heart. The
really great men must, I think, have great sadness on earth, he added
dreamily, not in the tone of the conversation.

He raised his eyes, looked earnestly at them all, smiled, and took his
cap. He was too quiet by comparison with his manner at his entrance, and
he felt this. Everyone got up.

Well, you may abuse me, be angry with me if you like, Porfiry
Petrovitch began again, but I cant resist. Allow me one little
question (I know I am troubling you). There is just one little notion I
want to express, simply that I may not forget it.

Very good, tell me your little notion, Raskolnikov stood waiting, pale
and grave before him.

Well, you see... I really dont know how to express it properly....
Its a playful, psychological idea.... When you were writing your
article, surely you couldnt have helped, he-he! fancying yourself...
just a little, an extraordinary man, uttering a _new word_ in your
sense.... Thats so, isnt it?

Quite possibly, Raskolnikov answered contemptuously.

Razumihin made a movement.

And, if so, could you bring yourself in case of worldly difficulties
and hardship or for some service to humanity--to overstep obstacles?...
For instance, to rob and murder?

And again he winked with his left eye, and laughed noiselessly just as
before.

If I did I certainly should not tell you, Raskolnikov answered with
defiant and haughty contempt.

No, I was only interested on account of your article, from a literary
point of view...

Foo! how obvious and insolent that is! Raskolnikov thought with
repulsion.

Allow me to observe, he answered dryly, that I dont consider myself
a Mahomet or a Napoleon, nor any personage of that kind, and not being
one of them I cannot tell you how I should act.

Oh, come, dont we all think ourselves Napoleons now in Russia?
 Porfiry Petrovitch said with alarming familiarity.

Something peculiar betrayed itself in the very intonation of his voice.

Perhaps it was one of these future Napoleons who did for Alyona
Ivanovna last week? Zametov blurted out from the corner.

Raskolnikov did not speak, but looked firmly and intently at Porfiry.
Razumihin was scowling gloomily. He seemed before this to be noticing
something. He looked angrily around. There was a minute of gloomy
silence. Raskolnikov turned to go.

Are you going already? Porfiry said amiably, holding out his hand with
excessive politeness. Very, very glad of your acquaintance. As for your
request, have no uneasiness, write just as I told you, or, better still,
come to me there yourself in a day or two... to-morrow, indeed. I shall
be there at eleven oclock for certain. Well arrange it all; well have
a talk. As one of the last to be _there_, you might perhaps be able to
tell us something, he added with a most good-natured expression.

You want to cross-examine me officially in due form? Raskolnikov asked
sharply.

Oh, why? Thats not necessary for the present. You misunderstand me.
I lose no opportunity, you see, and... Ive talked with all who had
pledges.... I obtained evidence from some of them, and you are the
last.... Yes, by the way, he cried, seemingly suddenly delighted, I
just remember, what was I thinking of? he turned to Razumihin, you
were talking my ears off about that Nikolay... of course, I know, I know
very well, he turned to Raskolnikov, that the fellow is innocent, but
what is one to do? We had to trouble Dmitri too.... This is the point,
this is all: when you went up the stairs it was past seven, wasnt it?

Yes, answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant sensation at the very
moment he spoke that he need not have said it.

Then when you went upstairs between seven and eight, didnt you see in
a flat that stood open on a second storey, do you remember? two workmen
or at least one of them? They were painting there, didnt you notice
them? Its very, very important for them.

Painters? No, I didnt see them, Raskolnikov answered slowly, as
though ransacking his memory, while at the same instant he was racking
every nerve, almost swooning with anxiety to conjecture as quickly as
possible where the trap lay and not to overlook anything. No, I didnt
see them, and I dont think I noticed a flat like that open.... But on
the fourth storey (he had mastered the trap now and was triumphant)
I remember now that someone was moving out of the flat opposite Alyona
Ivanovnas.... I remember... I remember it clearly. Some porters
were carrying out a sofa and they squeezed me against the wall. But
painters... no, I dont remember that there were any painters, and I
dont think that there was a flat open anywhere, no, there wasnt.

What do you mean? Razumihin shouted suddenly, as though he had
reflected and realised. Why, it was on the day of the murder the
painters were at work, and he was there three days before? What are you
asking?

Foo! I have muddled it! Porfiry slapped himself on the forehead.
Deuce take it! This business is turning my brain! he addressed
Raskolnikov somewhat apologetically. It would be such a great thing for
us to find out whether anyone had seen them between seven and eight at
the flat, so I fancied you could perhaps have told us something.... I
quite muddled it.

Then you should be more careful, Razumihin observed grimly.

The last words were uttered in the passage. Porfiry Petrovitch saw them
to the door with excessive politeness.

They went out into the street gloomy and sullen, and for some steps they
did not say a word. Raskolnikov drew a deep breath.



