CHAPTER I

So he lay a very long while. Now and then he seemed to wake up, and at
such moments he noticed that it was far into the night, but it did not
occur to him to get up. At last he noticed that it was beginning to get
light. He was lying on his back, still dazed from his recent oblivion.
Fearful, despairing cries rose shrilly from the street, sounds which he
heard every night, indeed, under his window after two oclock. They woke
him up now.

Ah! the drunken men are coming out of the taverns, he thought, its
past two oclock, and at once he leaped up, as though someone had
pulled him from the sofa.

What! Past two oclock!

He sat down on the sofa--and instantly recollected everything! All at
once, in one flash, he recollected everything.

For the first moment he thought he was going mad. A dreadful chill came
over him; but the chill was from the fever that had begun long before in
his sleep. Now he was suddenly taken with violent shivering, so that his
teeth chattered and all his limbs were shaking. He opened the door and
began listening--everything in the house was asleep. With amazement he
gazed at himself and everything in the room around him, wondering how he
could have come in the night before without fastening the door, and have
flung himself on the sofa without undressing, without even taking his
hat off. It had fallen off and was lying on the floor near his pillow.

If anyone had come in, what would he have thought? That Im drunk
but...

He rushed to the window. There was light enough, and he began hurriedly
looking himself all over from head to foot, all his clothes; were there
no traces? But there was no doing it like that; shivering with cold, he
began taking off everything and looking over again. He turned everything
over to the last threads and rags, and mistrusting himself, went through
his search three times.

But there seemed to be nothing, no trace, except in one place, where
some thick drops of congealed blood were clinging to the frayed edge
of his trousers. He picked up a big claspknife and cut off the frayed
threads. There seemed to be nothing more.

Suddenly he remembered that the purse and the things he had taken out of
the old womans box were still in his pockets! He had not thought till
then of taking them out and hiding them! He had not even thought of them
while he was examining his clothes! What next? Instantly he rushed
to take them out and fling them on the table. When he had pulled out
everything, and turned the pocket inside out to be sure there was
nothing left, he carried the whole heap to the corner. The paper had
come off the bottom of the wall and hung there in tatters. He began
stuffing all the things into the hole under the paper: Theyre in! All
out of sight, and the purse too! he thought gleefully, getting up and
gazing blankly at the hole which bulged out more than ever. Suddenly
he shuddered all over with horror; My God! he whispered in despair:
whats the matter with me? Is that hidden? Is that the way to hide
things?

He had not reckoned on having trinkets to hide. He had only thought of
money, and so had not prepared a hiding-place.

But now, now, what am I glad of? he thought, Is that hiding things?
My reasons deserting me--simply!

He sat down on the sofa in exhaustion and was at once shaken by another
unbearable fit of shivering. Mechanically he drew from a chair beside
him his old students winter coat, which was still warm though almost in
rags, covered himself up with it and once more sank into drowsiness and
delirium. He lost consciousness.

Not more than five minutes had passed when he jumped up a second time,
and at once pounced in a frenzy on his clothes again.

How could I go to sleep again with nothing done? Yes, yes; I have not
taken the loop off the armhole! I forgot it, forgot a thing like that!
Such a piece of evidence!

He pulled off the noose, hurriedly cut it to pieces and threw the bits
among his linen under the pillow.

Pieces of torn linen couldnt rouse suspicion, whatever happened; I
think not, I think not, any way! he repeated, standing in the middle
of the room, and with painful concentration he fell to gazing about
him again, at the floor and everywhere, trying to make sure he had not
forgotten anything. The conviction that all his faculties, even memory,
and the simplest power of reflection were failing him, began to be an
insufferable torture.

Surely it isnt beginning already! Surely it isnt my punishment coming
upon me? It is!

The frayed rags he had cut off his trousers were actually lying on the
floor in the middle of the room, where anyone coming in would see them!

What is the matter with me! he cried again, like one distraught.

Then a strange idea entered his head; that, perhaps, all his clothes
were covered with blood, that, perhaps, there were a great many
stains, but that he did not see them, did not notice them because
his perceptions were failing, were going to pieces... his reason was
clouded.... Suddenly he remembered that there had been blood on the
purse too. Ah! Then there must be blood on the pocket too, for I put
the wet purse in my pocket!

In a flash he had turned the pocket inside out and, yes!--there were
traces, stains on the lining of the pocket!

So my reason has not quite deserted me, so I still have some sense and
memory, since I guessed it of myself, he thought triumphantly, with
a deep sigh of relief; its simply the weakness of fever, a moments
delirium, and he tore the whole lining out of the left pocket of his
trousers. At that instant the sunlight fell on his left boot; on the
sock which poked out from the boot, he fancied there were traces! He
flung off his boots; traces indeed! The tip of the sock was soaked with
blood; he must have unwarily stepped into that pool.... But what am I
to do with this now? Where am I to put the sock and rags and pocket?

He gathered them all up in his hands and stood in the middle of the
room.

In the stove? But they would ransack the stove first of all. Burn them?
But what can I burn them with? There are no matches even. No, better
go out and throw it all away somewhere. Yes, better throw it away, he
repeated, sitting down on the sofa again, and at once, this minute,
without lingering...

But his head sank on the pillow instead. Again the unbearable icy
shivering came over him; again he drew his coat over him.

And for a long while, for some hours, he was haunted by the impulse to
go off somewhere at once, this moment, and fling it all away, so that
it may be out of sight and done with, at once, at once! Several times
he tried to rise from the sofa, but could not.

He was thoroughly waked up at last by a violent knocking at his door.

Open, do, are you dead or alive? He keeps sleeping here! shouted
Nastasya, banging with her fist on the door. For whole days together
hes snoring here like a dog! A dog he is too. Open I tell you. Its
past ten.

Maybe hes not at home, said a mans voice.

Ha! thats the porters voice.... What does he want?

He jumped up and sat on the sofa. The beating of his heart was a
positive pain.

Then who can have latched the door? retorted Nastasya. Hes taken to
bolting himself in! As if he were worth stealing! Open, you stupid, wake
up!

What do they want? Why the porter? Alls discovered. Resist or open?
Come what may!...

He half rose, stooped forward and unlatched the door.

His room was so small that he could undo the latch without leaving the
bed. Yes; the porter and Nastasya were standing there.

Nastasya stared at him in a strange way. He glanced with a defiant and
desperate air at the porter, who without a word held out a grey folded
paper sealed with bottle-wax.

A notice from the office, he announced, as he gave him the paper.

From what office?

A summons to the police office, of course. You know which office.

To the police?... What for?...

How can I tell? Youre sent for, so you go.

The man looked at him attentively, looked round the room and turned to
go away.

Hes downright ill! observed Nastasya, not taking her eyes off him.
The porter turned his head for a moment. Hes been in a fever since
yesterday, she added.

Raskolnikov made no response and held the paper in his hands, without
opening it. Dont you get up then, Nastasya went on compassionately,
seeing that he was letting his feet down from the sofa. Youre ill, and
so dont go; theres no such hurry. What have you got there?

He looked; in his right hand he held the shreds he had cut from his
trousers, the sock, and the rags of the pocket. So he had been asleep
with them in his hand. Afterwards reflecting upon it, he remembered that
half waking up in his fever, he had grasped all this tightly in his hand
and so fallen asleep again.

Look at the rags hes collected and sleeps with them, as though he has
got hold of a treasure...

And Nastasya went off into her hysterical giggle.

Instantly he thrust them all under his great coat and fixed his
eyes intently upon her. Far as he was from being capable of rational
reflection at that moment, he felt that no one would behave like that
with a person who was going to be arrested. But... the police?

Youd better have some tea! Yes? Ill bring it, theres some left.

No... Im going; Ill go at once, he muttered, getting on to his feet.

Why, youll never get downstairs!

Yes, Ill go.

As you please.

She followed the porter out.

At once he rushed to the light to examine the sock and the rags.

There are stains, but not very noticeable; all covered with dirt,
and rubbed and already discoloured. No one who had no suspicion could
distinguish anything. Nastasya from a distance could not have noticed,
thank God! Then with a tremor he broke the seal of the notice and began
reading; he was a long while reading, before he understood. It was an
ordinary summons from the district police-station to appear that day at
half-past nine at the office of the district superintendent.

But when has such a thing happened? I never have anything to do with
the police! And why just to-day? he thought in agonising bewilderment.
Good God, only get it over soon!

He was flinging himself on his knees to pray, but broke into
laughter--not at the idea of prayer, but at himself.

He began, hurriedly dressing. If Im lost, I am lost, I dont care!
Shall I put the sock on? he suddenly wondered, it will get dustier
still and the traces will be gone.

But no sooner had he put it on than he pulled it off again in loathing
and horror. He pulled it off, but reflecting that he had no other socks,
he picked it up and put it on again--and again he laughed.

Thats all conventional, thats all relative, merely a way of looking
at it, he thought in a flash, but only on the top surface of his
mind, while he was shuddering all over, there, Ive got it on! I have
finished by getting it on!

But his laughter was quickly followed by despair.

No, its too much for me... he thought. His legs shook. From fear,
 he muttered. His head swam and ached with fever. Its a trick! They
want to decoy me there and confound me over everything, he mused, as
he went out on to the stairs--the worst of it is Im almost
light-headed... I may blurt out something stupid...

On the stairs he remembered that he was leaving all the things just as
they were in the hole in the wall, and very likely, its on purpose
to search when Im out, he thought, and stopped short. But he was
possessed by such despair, such cynicism of misery, if one may so call
it, that with a wave of his hand he went on. Only to get it over!

In the street the heat was insufferable again; not a drop of rain had
fallen all those days. Again dust, bricks and mortar, again the stench
from the shops and pot-houses, again the drunken men, the Finnish
pedlars and half-broken-down cabs. The sun shone straight in his eyes,
so that it hurt him to look out of them, and he felt his head going
round--as a man in a fever is apt to feel when he comes out into the
street on a bright sunny day.

When he reached the turning into _the_ street, in an agony of
trepidation he looked down it... at _the_ house... and at once averted
his eyes.

If they question me, perhaps Ill simply tell, he thought, as he drew
near the police-station.

The police-station was about a quarter of a mile off. It had lately been
moved to new rooms on the fourth floor of a new house. He had been once
for a moment in the old office but long ago. Turning in at the gateway,
he saw on the right a flight of stairs which a peasant was mounting with
a book in his hand. A house-porter, no doubt; so then, the office is
here, and he began ascending the stairs on the chance. He did not want
to ask questions of anyone.

Ill go in, fall on my knees, and confess everything... he thought, as
he reached the fourth floor.

The staircase was steep, narrow and all sloppy with dirty water. The
kitchens of the flats opened on to the stairs and stood open almost
the whole day. So there was a fearful smell and heat. The staircase
was crowded with porters going up and down with their books under their
arms, policemen, and persons of all sorts and both sexes. The door of
the office, too, stood wide open. Peasants stood waiting within. There,
too, the heat was stifling and there was a sickening smell of fresh
paint and stale oil from the newly decorated rooms.

After waiting a little, he decided to move forward into the next room.
All the rooms were small and low-pitched. A fearful impatience drew him
on and on. No one paid attention to him. In the second room some
clerks sat writing, dressed hardly better than he was, and rather a
queer-looking set. He went up to one of them.

What is it?

He showed the notice he had received.

You are a student? the man asked, glancing at the notice.

Yes, formerly a student.

The clerk looked at him, but without the slightest interest. He was a
particularly unkempt person with the look of a fixed idea in his eye.

There would be no getting anything out of him, because he has no
interest in anything, thought Raskolnikov.

Go in there to the head clerk, said the clerk, pointing towards the
furthest room.

He went into that room--the fourth in order; it was a small room and
packed full of people, rather better dressed than in the outer rooms.
Among them were two ladies. One, poorly dressed in mourning, sat at the
table opposite the chief clerk, writing something at his dictation.
The other, a very stout, buxom woman with a purplish-red, blotchy face,
excessively smartly dressed with a brooch on her bosom as big as a
saucer, was standing on one side, apparently waiting for something.
Raskolnikov thrust his notice upon the head clerk. The latter glanced
at it, said: Wait a minute, and went on attending to the lady in
mourning.

He breathed more freely. It cant be that!

By degrees he began to regain confidence, he kept urging himself to have
courage and be calm.

Some foolishness, some trifling carelessness, and I may betray myself!
Hm... its a pity theres no air here, he added, its stifling.... It
makes ones head dizzier than ever... and ones mind too...

He was conscious of a terrible inner turmoil. He was afraid of losing
his self-control; he tried to catch at something and fix his mind on it,
something quite irrelevant, but he could not succeed in this at all. Yet
the head clerk greatly interested him, he kept hoping to see through him
and guess something from his face.

He was a very young man, about two and twenty, with a dark mobile
face that looked older than his years. He was fashionably dressed and
foppish, with his hair parted in the middle, well combed and pomaded,
and wore a number of rings on his well-scrubbed fingers and a gold chain
on his waistcoat. He said a couple of words in French to a foreigner who
was in the room, and said them fairly correctly.

Luise Ivanovna, you can sit down, he said casually to the
gaily-dressed, purple-faced lady, who was still standing as though not
venturing to sit down, though there was a chair beside her.

Ich danke, said the latter, and softly, with a rustle of silk she sank
into the chair. Her light blue dress trimmed with white lace floated
about the table like an air-balloon and filled almost half the room. She
smelt of scent. But she was obviously embarrassed at filling half
the room and smelling so strongly of scent; and though her smile was
impudent as well as cringing, it betrayed evident uneasiness.

The lady in mourning had done at last, and got up. All at once, with
some noise, an officer walked in very jauntily, with a peculiar swing of
his shoulders at each step. He tossed his cockaded cap on the table and
sat down in an easy-chair. The small lady positively skipped from her
seat on seeing him, and fell to curtsying in a sort of ecstasy; but the
officer took not the smallest notice of her, and she did not venture to
sit down again in his presence. He was the assistant superintendent. He
had a reddish moustache that stood out horizontally on each side of his
face, and extremely small features, expressive of nothing much except
a certain insolence. He looked askance and rather indignantly at
Raskolnikov; he was so very badly dressed, and in spite of his
humiliating position, his bearing was by no means in keeping with his
clothes. Raskolnikov had unwarily fixed a very long and direct look on
him, so that he felt positively affronted.

What do you want? he shouted, apparently astonished that such a ragged
fellow was not annihilated by the majesty of his glance.

I was summoned... by a notice... Raskolnikov faltered.

For the recovery of money due, from _the student_, the head clerk
interfered hurriedly, tearing himself from his papers. Here! and he
flung Raskolnikov a document and pointed out the place. Read that!

Money? What money? thought Raskolnikov, but... then... its certainly
not _that_.

And he trembled with joy. He felt sudden intense indescribable relief. A
load was lifted from his back.

And pray, what time were you directed to appear, sir? shouted the
assistant superintendent, seeming for some unknown reason more and more
aggrieved. You are told to come at nine, and now its twelve!

The notice was only brought me a quarter of an hour ago, Raskolnikov
answered loudly over his shoulder. To his own surprise he, too, grew
suddenly angry and found a certain pleasure in it. And its enough that
I have come here ill with fever.

Kindly refrain from shouting!

Im not shouting, Im speaking very quietly, its you who are shouting
at me. Im a student, and allow no one to shout at me.

The assistant superintendent was so furious that for the first minute he
could only splutter inarticulately. He leaped up from his seat.

Be silent! You are in a government office. Dont be impudent, sir!

Youre in a government office, too, cried Raskolnikov, and youre
smoking a cigarette as well as shouting, so you are showing disrespect
to all of us.

He felt an indescribable satisfaction at having said this.

The head clerk looked at him with a smile. The angry assistant
superintendent was obviously disconcerted.

Thats not your business! he shouted at last with unnatural loudness.
Kindly make the declaration demanded of you. Show him. Alexandr
Grigorievitch. There is a complaint against you! You dont pay your
debts! Youre a fine bird!

But Raskolnikov was not listening now; he had eagerly clutched at the
paper, in haste to find an explanation. He read it once, and a second
time, and still did not understand.

What is this? he asked the head clerk.

It is for the recovery of money on an I O U, a writ. You must
either pay it, with all expenses, costs and so on, or give a written
declaration when you can pay it, and at the same time an undertaking not
to leave the capital without payment, and nor to sell or conceal your
property. The creditor is at liberty to sell your property, and proceed
against you according to the law.

But I... am not in debt to anyone!

Thats not our business. Here, an I O U for a hundred and fifteen
roubles, legally attested, and due for payment, has been brought us
for recovery, given by you to the widow of the assessor Zarnitsyn, nine
months ago, and paid over by the widow Zarnitsyn to one Mr. Tchebarov.
We therefore summon you, hereupon.

But she is my landlady!

And what if she is your landlady?

The head clerk looked at him with a condescending smile of compassion,
and at the same time with a certain triumph, as at a novice under fire
for the first time--as though he would say: Well, how do you feel now?
 But what did he care now for an I O U, for a writ of recovery! Was that
worth worrying about now, was it worth attention even! He stood, he
read, he listened, he answered, he even asked questions himself, but
all mechanically. The triumphant sense of security, of deliverance from
overwhelming danger, that was what filled his whole soul that moment
without thought for the future, without analysis, without suppositions
or surmises, without doubts and without questioning. It was an instant
of full, direct, purely instinctive joy. But at that very moment
something like a thunderstorm took place in the office. The assistant
superintendent, still shaken by Raskolnikovs disrespect, still fuming
and obviously anxious to keep up his wounded dignity, pounced on the
unfortunate smart lady, who had been gazing at him ever since he came in
with an exceedingly silly smile.

You shameful hussy! he shouted suddenly at the top of his voice. (The
lady in mourning had left the office.) What was going on at your house
last night? Eh! A disgrace again, youre a scandal to the whole street.
Fighting and drinking again. Do you want the house of correction? Why,
I have warned you ten times over that I would not let you off the
eleventh! And here you are again, again, you... you...!

The paper fell out of Raskolnikovs hands, and he looked wildly at the
smart lady who was so unceremoniously treated. But he soon saw what it
meant, and at once began to find positive amusement in the scandal. He
listened with pleasure, so that he longed to laugh and laugh... all his
nerves were on edge.

Ilya Petrovitch! the head clerk was beginning anxiously, but stopped
short, for he knew from experience that the enraged assistant could not
be stopped except by force.

As for the smart lady, at first she positively trembled before the
storm. But, strange to say, the more numerous and violent the terms of
abuse became, the more amiable she looked, and the more seductive the
smiles she lavished on the terrible assistant. She moved uneasily, and
curtsied incessantly, waiting impatiently for a chance of putting in her
word: and at last she found it.

There was no sort of noise or fighting in my house, Mr. Captain, she
pattered all at once, like peas dropping, speaking Russian confidently,
though with a strong German accent, and no sort of scandal, and his
honour came drunk, and its the whole truth I am telling, Mr. Captain,
and I am not to blame.... Mine is an honourable house, Mr. Captain,
and honourable behaviour, Mr. Captain, and I always, always dislike any
scandal myself. But he came quite tipsy, and asked for three bottles
again, and then he lifted up one leg, and began playing the pianoforte
with one foot, and that is not at all right in an honourable house, and
he _ganz_ broke the piano, and it was very bad manners indeed and I said
so. And he took up a bottle and began hitting everyone with it. And then
I called the porter, and Karl came, and he took Karl and hit him in the
eye; and he hit Henriette in the eye, too, and gave me five slaps on the
cheek. And it was so ungentlemanly in an honourable house, Mr. Captain,
and I screamed. And he opened the window over the canal, and stood in
the window, squealing like a little pig; it was a disgrace. The idea of
squealing like a little pig at the window into the street! Fie upon him!
And Karl pulled him away from the window by his coat, and it is true,
Mr. Captain, he tore _sein rock_. And then he shouted that _man muss_
pay him fifteen roubles damages. And I did pay him, Mr. Captain, five
roubles for _sein rock_. And he is an ungentlemanly visitor and caused
all the scandal. I will show you up, he said, for I can write to all
the papers about you.

Then he was an author?

Yes, Mr. Captain, and what an ungentlemanly visitor in an honourable
house....

Now then! Enough! I have told you already...

Ilya Petrovitch! the head clerk repeated significantly.

The assistant glanced rapidly at him; the head clerk slightly shook his
head.

... So I tell you this, most respectable Luise Ivanovna, and I tell it
you for the last time, the assistant went on. If there is a scandal
in your honourable house once again, I will put you yourself in the
lock-up, as it is called in polite society. Do you hear? So a literary
man, an author took five roubles for his coat-tail in an honourable
house? A nice set, these authors!

And he cast a contemptuous glance at Raskolnikov. There was a scandal
the other day in a restaurant, too. An author had eaten his dinner and
would not pay; Ill write a satire on you, says he. And there was
another of them on a steamer last week used the most disgraceful
language to the respectable family of a civil councillor, his wife and
daughter. And there was one of them turned out of a confectioners shop
the other day. They are like that, authors, literary men, students,
town-criers.... Pfoo! You get along! I shall look in upon you myself one
day. Then you had better be careful! Do you hear?

With hurried deference, Luise Ivanovna fell to curtsying in all
directions, and so curtsied herself to the door. But at the door, she
stumbled backwards against a good-looking officer with a fresh, open
face and splendid thick fair whiskers. This was the superintendent of
the district himself, Nikodim Fomitch. Luise Ivanovna made haste
to curtsy almost to the ground, and with mincing little steps, she
fluttered out of the office.

Again thunder and lightning--a hurricane! said Nikodim Fomitch to Ilya
Petrovitch in a civil and friendly tone. You are aroused again, you are
fuming again! I heard it on the stairs!

Well, what then! Ilya Petrovitch drawled with gentlemanly nonchalance;
and he walked with some papers to another table, with a jaunty swing of
his shoulders at each step. Here, if you will kindly look: an author,
or a student, has been one at least, does not pay his debts, has given
an I O U, wont clear out of his room, and complaints are constantly
being lodged against him, and here he has been pleased to make a protest
against my smoking in his presence! He behaves like a cad himself, and
just look at him, please. Heres the gentleman, and very attractive he
is!

Poverty is not a vice, my friend, but we know you go off like powder,
you cant bear a slight, I daresay you took offence at something and
went too far yourself, continued Nikodim Fomitch, turning affably to
Raskolnikov. But you were wrong there; he is a capital fellow, I assure
you, but explosive, explosive! He gets hot, fires up, boils over, and no
stopping him! And then its all over! And at the bottom hes a heart of
gold! His nickname in the regiment was the Explosive Lieutenant....

And what a regiment it was, too, cried Ilya Petrovitch, much gratified
at this agreeable banter, though still sulky.

Raskolnikov had a sudden desire to say something exceptionally pleasant
to them all. Excuse me, Captain, he began easily, suddenly addressing
Nikodim Fomitch, will you enter into my position?... I am ready to
ask pardon, if I have been ill-mannered. I am a poor student, sick
and shattered (shattered was the word he used) by poverty. I am not
studying, because I cannot keep myself now, but I shall get money.... I
have a mother and sister in the province of X. They will send it to
me, and I will pay. My landlady is a good-hearted woman, but she is so
exasperated at my having lost my lessons, and not paying her for the
last four months, that she does not even send up my dinner... and I
dont understand this I O U at all. She is asking me to pay her on this
I O U. How am I to pay her? Judge for yourselves!...

But that is not our business, you know, the head clerk was observing.

Yes, yes. I perfectly agree with you. But allow me to explain...
 Raskolnikov put in again, still addressing Nikodim Fomitch, but trying
his best to address Ilya Petrovitch also, though the latter persistently
appeared to be rummaging among his papers and to be contemptuously
oblivious of him. Allow me to explain that I have been living with her
for nearly three years and at first... at first... for why should I not
confess it, at the very beginning I promised to marry her daughter, it
was a verbal promise, freely given... she was a girl... indeed, I liked
her, though I was not in love with her... a youthful affair in fact...
that is, I mean to say, that my landlady gave me credit freely in those
days, and I led a life of... I was very heedless...

Nobody asks you for these personal details, sir, weve no time to
waste, Ilya Petrovitch interposed roughly and with a note of triumph;
but Raskolnikov stopped him hotly, though he suddenly found it
exceedingly difficult to speak.

But excuse me, excuse me. It is for me to explain... how it all
happened... In my turn... though I agree with you... it is unnecessary.
But a year ago, the girl died of typhus. I remained lodging there as
before, and when my landlady moved into her present quarters, she said
to me... and in a friendly way... that she had complete trust in me,
but still, would I not give her an I O U for one hundred and fifteen
roubles, all the debt I owed her. She said if only I gave her that,
she would trust me again, as much as I liked, and that she would never,
never--those were her own words--make use of that I O U till I could pay
of myself... and now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing to
eat, she takes action against me. What am I to say to that?

All these affecting details are no business of ours. Ilya Petrovitch
interrupted rudely. You must give a written undertaking but as for your
love affairs and all these tragic events, we have nothing to do with
that.

Come now... you are harsh, muttered Nikodim Fomitch, sitting down at
the table and also beginning to write. He looked a little ashamed.

Write! said the head clerk to Raskolnikov.

Write what? the latter asked, gruffly.

I will dictate to you.

Raskolnikov fancied that the head clerk treated him more casually and
contemptuously after his speech, but strange to say he suddenly felt
completely indifferent to anyones opinion, and this revulsion took
place in a flash, in one instant. If he had cared to think a little,
he would have been amazed indeed that he could have talked to them like
that a minute before, forcing his feelings upon them. And where had
those feelings come from? Now if the whole room had been filled, not
with police officers, but with those nearest and dearest to him, he
would not have found one human word for them, so empty was his heart. A
gloomy sensation of agonising, everlasting solitude and remoteness, took
conscious form in his soul. It was not the meanness of his sentimental
effusions before Ilya Petrovitch, nor the meanness of the latters
triumph over him that had caused this sudden revulsion in his heart.
Oh, what had he to do now with his own baseness, with all these petty
vanities, officers, German women, debts, police-offices? If he had been
sentenced to be burnt at that moment, he would not have stirred, would
hardly have heard the sentence to the end. Something was happening to
him entirely new, sudden and unknown. It was not that he understood, but
he felt clearly with all the intensity of sensation that he could
never more appeal to these people in the police-office with sentimental
effusions like his recent outburst, or with anything whatever; and that
if they had been his own brothers and sisters and not police-officers,
it would have been utterly out of the question to appeal to them in any
circumstance of life. He had never experienced such a strange and awful
sensation. And what was most agonising--it was more a sensation than a
conception or idea, a direct sensation, the most agonising of all the
sensations he had known in his life.

The head clerk began dictating to him the usual form of declaration,
that he could not pay, that he undertook to do so at a future date, that
he would not leave the town, nor sell his property, and so on.

But you cant write, you can hardly hold the pen, observed the head
clerk, looking with curiosity at Raskolnikov. Are you ill?

Yes, I am giddy. Go on!

Thats all. Sign it.

The head clerk took the paper, and turned to attend to others.

Raskolnikov gave back the pen; but instead of getting up and going away,
he put his elbows on the table and pressed his head in his hands. He
felt as if a nail were being driven into his skull. A strange idea
suddenly occurred to him, to get up at once, to go up to Nikodim
Fomitch, and tell him everything that had happened yesterday, and then
to go with him to his lodgings and to show him the things in the hole
in the corner. The impulse was so strong that he got up from his seat
to carry it out. Hadnt I better think a minute? flashed through his
mind. No, better cast off the burden without thinking. But all at once
he stood still, rooted to the spot. Nikodim Fomitch was talking eagerly
with Ilya Petrovitch, and the words reached him:

Its impossible, theyll both be released. To begin with, the whole
story contradicts itself. Why should they have called the porter, if it
had been their doing? To inform against themselves? Or as a blind? No,
that would be too cunning! Besides, Pestryakov, the student, was seen at
the gate by both the porters and a woman as he went in. He was walking
with three friends, who left him only at the gate, and he asked the
porters to direct him, in the presence of the friends. Now, would he
have asked his way if he had been going with such an object? As for
Koch, he spent half an hour at the silversmiths below, before he went
up to the old woman and he left him at exactly a quarter to eight. Now
just consider...

But excuse me, how do you explain this contradiction? They state
themselves that they knocked and the door was locked; yet three minutes
later when they went up with the porter, it turned out the door was
unfastened.

Thats just it; the murderer must have been there and bolted himself
in; and theyd have caught him for a certainty if Koch had not been
an ass and gone to look for the porter too. _He_ must have seized the
interval to get downstairs and slip by them somehow. Koch keeps crossing
himself and saying: If I had been there, he would have jumped out and
killed me with his axe. He is going to have a thanksgiving service--ha,
ha!

And no one saw the murderer?

They might well not see him; the house is a regular Noahs Ark, said
the head clerk, who was listening.

Its clear, quite clear, Nikodim Fomitch repeated warmly.

No, it is anything but clear, Ilya Petrovitch maintained.

Raskolnikov picked up his hat and walked towards the door, but he did
not reach it....

When he recovered consciousness, he found himself sitting in a chair,
supported by someone on the right side, while someone else was standing
on the left, holding a yellowish glass filled with yellow water, and
Nikodim Fomitch standing before him, looking intently at him. He got up
from the chair.

Whats this? Are you ill? Nikodim Fomitch asked, rather sharply.

He could hardly hold his pen when he was signing, said the head clerk,
settling back in his place, and taking up his work again.

Have you been ill long? cried Ilya Petrovitch from his place, where
he, too, was looking through papers. He had, of course, come to look at
the sick man when he fainted, but retired at once when he recovered.

Since yesterday, muttered Raskolnikov in reply.

Did you go out yesterday?

Yes.

Though you were ill?

Yes.

At what time?

About seven.

And where did you go, may I ask?

Along the street.

Short and clear.

Raskolnikov, white as a handkerchief, had answered sharply, jerkily,
without dropping his black feverish eyes before Ilya Petrovitchs stare.

He can scarcely stand upright. And you... Nikodim Fomitch was
beginning.

No matter, Ilya Petrovitch pronounced rather peculiarly.

Nikodim Fomitch would have made some further protest, but glancing at
the head clerk who was looking very hard at him, he did not speak. There
was a sudden silence. It was strange.

Very well, then, concluded Ilya Petrovitch, we will not detain you.

Raskolnikov went out. He caught the sound of eager conversation on his
departure, and above the rest rose the questioning voice of Nikodim
Fomitch. In the street, his faintness passed off completely.

A search--there will be a search at once, he repeated to himself,
hurrying home. The brutes! they suspect.

His former terror mastered him completely again.



