CHAPTER V

Lebeziatnikov looked perturbed.

Ive come to you, Sofya Semyonovna, he began. Excuse me... I thought
I should find you, he said, addressing Raskolnikov suddenly, that is,
I didnt mean anything... of that sort... But I just thought... Katerina
Ivanovna has gone out of her mind, he blurted out suddenly, turning
from Raskolnikov to Sonia.

Sonia screamed.

At least it seems so. But... we dont know what to do, you see! She
came back--she seems to have been turned out somewhere, perhaps
beaten.... So it seems at least,... She had run to your fathers former
chief, she didnt find him at home: he was dining at some other
generals.... Only fancy, she rushed off there, to the other generals,
and, imagine, she was so persistent that she managed to get the chief to
see her, had him fetched out from dinner, it seems. You can imagine what
happened. She was turned out, of course; but, according to her own
story, she abused him and threw something at him. One may well believe
it.... How it is she wasnt taken up, I cant understand! Now she is
telling everyone, including Amalia Ivanovna; but its difficult to
understand her, she is screaming and flinging herself about.... Oh yes,
she shouts that since everyone has abandoned her, she will take the
children and go into the street with a barrel-organ, and the children
will sing and dance, and she too, and collect money, and will go every
day under the generals window... to let everyone see well-born
children, whose father was an official, begging in the street. She
keeps beating the children and they are all crying. She is teaching Lida
to sing My Village, the boy to dance, Polenka the same. She is tearing
up all the clothes, and making them little caps like actors; she means
to carry a tin basin and make it tinkle, instead of music.... She wont
listen to anything.... Imagine the state of things! Its beyond
anything!

Lebeziatnikov would have gone on, but Sonia, who had heard him almost
breathless, snatched up her cloak and hat, and ran out of the room,
putting on her things as she went. Raskolnikov followed her and
Lebeziatnikov came after him.

She has certainly gone mad! he said to Raskolnikov, as they went out
into the street. I didnt want to frighten Sofya Semyonovna, so I said
it seemed like it, but there isnt a doubt of it. They say that in
consumption the tubercles sometimes occur in the brain; its a pity I
know nothing of medicine. I did try to persuade her, but she wouldnt
listen.

Did you talk to her about the tubercles?

Not precisely of the tubercles. Besides, she wouldnt have understood!
But what I say is, that if you convince a person logically that he
has nothing to cry about, hell stop crying. Thats clear. Is it your
conviction that he wont?

Life would be too easy if it were so, answered Raskolnikov.

Excuse me, excuse me; of course it would be rather difficult for
Katerina Ivanovna to understand, but do you know that in Paris they have
been conducting serious experiments as to the possibility of curing the
insane, simply by logical argument? One professor there, a scientific
man of standing, lately dead, believed in the possibility of such
treatment. His idea was that theres nothing really wrong with the
physical organism of the insane, and that insanity is, so to say, a
logical mistake, an error of judgment, an incorrect view of things. He
gradually showed the madman his error and, would you believe it, they
say he was successful? But as he made use of douches too, how far
success was due to that treatment remains uncertain.... So it seems at
least.

Raskolnikov had long ceased to listen. Reaching the house where he
lived, he nodded to Lebeziatnikov and went in at the gate. Lebeziatnikov
woke up with a start, looked about him and hurried on.

Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood still in the middle
of it. Why had he come back here? He looked at the yellow and tattered
paper, at the dust, at his sofa.... From the yard came a loud continuous
knocking; someone seemed to be hammering... He went to the window, rose
on tiptoe and looked out into the yard for a long time with an air of
absorbed attention. But the yard was empty and he could not see who was
hammering. In the house on the left he saw some open windows; on the
window-sills were pots of sickly-looking geraniums. Linen was hung out
of the windows... He knew it all by heart. He turned away and sat down
on the sofa.

Never, never had he felt himself so fearfully alone!

Yes, he felt once more that he would perhaps come to hate Sonia, now
that he had made her more miserable.

Why had he gone to her to beg for her tears? What need had he to poison
her life? Oh, the meanness of it!

I will remain alone, he said resolutely, and she shall not come to
the prison!

Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. That was a
strange thought.

Perhaps it really would be better in Siberia, he thought suddenly.

He could not have said how long he sat there with vague thoughts surging
through his mind. All at once the door opened and Dounia came in. At
first she stood still and looked at him from the doorway, just as he
had done at Sonia; then she came in and sat down in the same place
as yesterday, on the chair facing him. He looked silently and almost
vacantly at her.

Dont be angry, brother; Ive only come for one minute, said Dounia.

Her face looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were bright and soft.
He saw that she too had come to him with love.

Brother, now I know all, _all_. Dmitri Prokofitch has explained and
told me everything. They are worrying and persecuting you through a
stupid and contemptible suspicion.... Dmitri Prokofitch told me that
there is no danger, and that you are wrong in looking upon it with such
horror. I dont think so, and I fully understand how indignant you must
be, and that that indignation may have a permanent effect on you. Thats
what I am afraid of. As for your cutting yourself off from us, I dont
judge you, I dont venture to judge you, and forgive me for having
blamed you for it. I feel that I too, if I had so great a trouble,
should keep away from everyone. I shall tell mother nothing _of this_,
but I shall talk about you continually and shall tell her from you that
you will come very soon. Dont worry about her; _I_ will set her mind at
rest; but dont you try her too much--come once at least; remember that
she is your mother. And now I have come simply to say (Dounia began
to get up) that if you should need me or should need... all my life or
anything... call me, and Ill come. Good-bye!

She turned abruptly and went towards the door.

Dounia! Raskolnikov stopped her and went towards her. That Razumihin,
Dmitri Prokofitch, is a very good fellow.

Dounia flushed slightly.

Well? she asked, waiting a moment.

He is competent, hardworking, honest and capable of real love....
Good-bye, Dounia.

Dounia flushed crimson, then suddenly she took alarm.

But what does it mean, brother? Are we really parting for ever that
you... give me such a parting message?

Never mind.... Good-bye.

He turned away, and walked to the window. She stood a moment, looked at
him uneasily, and went out troubled.

No, he was not cold to her. There was an instant (the very last one)
when he had longed to take her in his arms and _say good-bye_ to her,
and even _to tell_ her, but he had not dared even to touch her hand.

Afterwards she may shudder when she remembers that I embraced her, and
will feel that I stole her kiss.

And would _she_ stand that test? he went on a few minutes later to
himself. No, she wouldnt; girls like that cant stand things! They
never do.

And he thought of Sonia.

There was a breath of fresh air from the window. The daylight was
fading. He took up his cap and went out.

He could not, of course, and would not consider how ill he was. But all
this continual anxiety and agony of mind could not but affect him. And
if he were not lying in high fever it was perhaps just because this
continual inner strain helped to keep him on his legs and in possession
of his faculties. But this artificial excitement could not last long.

He wandered aimlessly. The sun was setting. A special form of misery had
begun to oppress him of late. There was nothing poignant, nothing acute
about it; but there was a feeling of permanence, of eternity about it;
it brought a foretaste of hopeless years of this cold leaden misery, a
foretaste of an eternity on a square yard of space. Towards evening
this sensation usually began to weigh on him more heavily.

With this idiotic, purely physical weakness, depending on the sunset or
something, one cant help doing something stupid! Youll go to Dounia,
as well as to Sonia, he muttered bitterly.

He heard his name called. He looked round. Lebeziatnikov rushed up to
him.

Only fancy, Ive been to your room looking for you. Only fancy, shes
carried out her plan, and taken away the children. Sofya Semyonovna and
I have had a job to find them. She is rapping on a frying-pan and making
the children dance. The children are crying. They keep stopping at the
cross-roads and in front of shops; theres a crowd of fools running
after them. Come along!

And Sonia? Raskolnikov asked anxiously, hurrying after Lebeziatnikov.

Simply frantic. That is, its not Sofya Semyonovnas frantic, but
Katerina Ivanovna, though Sofya Semyonovas frantic too. But Katerina
Ivanovna is absolutely frantic. I tell you she is quite mad. Theyll be
taken to the police. You can fancy what an effect that will have....
They are on the canal bank, near the bridge now, not far from Sofya
Semyonovnas, quite close.

On the canal bank near the bridge and not two houses away from the one
where Sonia lodged, there was a crowd of people, consisting principally
of gutter children. The hoarse broken voice of Katerina Ivanovna could
be heard from the bridge, and it certainly was a strange spectacle
likely to attract a street crowd. Katerina Ivanovna in her old dress
with the green shawl, wearing a torn straw hat, crushed in a hideous way
on one side, was really frantic. She was exhausted and breathless. Her
wasted consumptive face looked more suffering than ever, and indeed out
of doors in the sunshine a consumptive always looks worse than at home.
But her excitement did not flag, and every moment her irritation grew
more intense. She rushed at the children, shouted at them, coaxed
them, told them before the crowd how to dance and what to sing, began
explaining to them why it was necessary, and driven to desperation by
their not understanding, beat them.... Then she would make a rush at the
crowd; if she noticed any decently dressed person stopping to look, she
immediately appealed to him to see what these children from a genteel,
one may say aristocratic, house had been brought to. If she heard
laughter or jeering in the crowd, she would rush at once at the scoffers
and begin squabbling with them. Some people laughed, others shook their
heads, but everyone felt curious at the sight of the madwoman with the
frightened children. The frying-pan of which Lebeziatnikov had spoken
was not there, at least Raskolnikov did not see it. But instead of
rapping on the pan, Katerina Ivanovna began clapping her wasted hands,
when she made Lida and Kolya dance and Polenka sing. She too joined in
the singing, but broke down at the second note with a fearful cough,
which made her curse in despair and even shed tears. What made her most
furious was the weeping and terror of Kolya and Lida. Some effort had
been made to dress the children up as street singers are dressed. The
boy had on a turban made of something red and white to look like a Turk.
There had been no costume for Lida; she simply had a red knitted cap,
or rather a night cap that had belonged to Marmeladov, decorated with
a broken piece of white ostrich feather, which had been Katerina
Ivanovnas grandmothers and had been preserved as a family possession.
Polenka was in her everyday dress; she looked in timid perplexity at her
mother, and kept at her side, hiding her tears. She dimly realised her
mothers condition, and looked uneasily about her. She was terribly
frightened of the street and the crowd. Sonia followed Katerina
Ivanovna, weeping and beseeching her to return home, but Katerina
Ivanovna was not to be persuaded.

Leave off, Sonia, leave off, she shouted, speaking fast, panting and
coughing. You dont know what you ask; you are like a child! Ive
told you before that I am not coming back to that drunken German. Let
everyone, let all Petersburg see the children begging in the streets,
though their father was an honourable man who served all his life in
truth and fidelity, and one may say died in the service. (Katerina
Ivanovna had by now invented this fantastic story and thoroughly
believed it.) Let that wretch of a general see it! And you are silly,
Sonia: what have we to eat? Tell me that. We have worried you enough, I
wont go on so! Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, is that you? she cried, seeing
Raskolnikov and rushing up to him. Explain to this silly girl, please,
that nothing better could be done! Even organ-grinders earn their
living, and everyone will see at once that we are different, that we are
an honourable and bereaved family reduced to beggary. And that general
will lose his post, youll see! We shall perform under his windows every
day, and if the Tsar drives by, Ill fall on my knees, put the children
before me, show them to him, and say Defend us father. He is the
father of the fatherless, he is merciful, hell protect us, youll
see, and that wretch of a general.... Lida, _tenez vous droite_! Kolya,
youll dance again. Why are you whimpering? Whimpering again! What
are you afraid of, stupid? Goodness, what am I to do with them, Rodion
Romanovitch? If you only knew how stupid they are! Whats one to do with
such children?

And she, almost crying herself--which did not stop her uninterrupted,
rapid flow of talk--pointed to the crying children. Raskolnikov tried
to persuade her to go home, and even said, hoping to work on her vanity,
that it was unseemly for her to be wandering about the streets like
an organ-grinder, as she was intending to become the principal of a
boarding-school.

A boarding-school, ha-ha-ha! A castle in the air, cried Katerina
Ivanovna, her laugh ending in a cough. No, Rodion Romanovitch, that
dream is over! All have forsaken us!... And that general.... You know,
Rodion Romanovitch, I threw an inkpot at him--it happened to be standing
in the waiting-room by the paper where you sign your name. I wrote my
name, threw it at him and ran away. Oh, the scoundrels, the scoundrels!
But enough of them, now Ill provide for the children myself, I wont
bow down to anybody! She has had to bear enough for us! she pointed
to Sonia. Polenka, how much have you got? Show me! What, only two
farthings! Oh, the mean wretches! They give us nothing, only run after
us, putting their tongues out. There, what is that blockhead laughing
at? (She pointed to a man in the crowd.) Its all because Kolya here
is so stupid; I have such a bother with him. What do you want, Polenka?
Tell me in French, _parlez-moi franais_. Why, Ive taught you, you know
some phrases. Else how are you to show that you are of good family, well
brought-up children, and not at all like other organ-grinders? We arent
going to have a Punch and Judy show in the street, but to sing a genteel
song.... Ah, yes,... What are we to sing? You keep putting me out,
but we... you see, we are standing here, Rodion Romanovitch, to find
something to sing and get money, something Kolya can dance to.... For,
as you can fancy, our performance is all impromptu.... We must talk it
over and rehearse it all thoroughly, and then we shall go to Nevsky,
where there are far more people of good society, and we shall be noticed
at once. Lida knows My Village only, nothing but My Village, and
everyone sings that. We must sing something far more genteel.... Well,
have you thought of anything, Polenka? If only youd help your mother!
My memorys quite gone, or I should have thought of something. We really
cant sing An Hussar. Ah, let us sing in French, Cinq sous, I have
taught it you, I have taught it you. And as it is in French, people will
see at once that you are children of good family, and that will be much
more touching.... You might sing Marlborough sen va-t-en guerre,
for thats quite a childs song and is sung as a lullaby in all the
aristocratic houses.

_Marlborough sen va-t-en guerre Ne sait quand reviendra_...
 she began singing. But no, better sing Cinq sous. Now, Kolya, your
hands on your hips, make haste, and you, Lida, keep turning the other
way, and Polenka and I will sing and clap our hands!

_Cinq sous, cinq sous Pour monter notre menage_.

(Cough-cough-cough!) Set your dress straight, Polenka, its slipped
down on your shoulders, she observed, panting from coughing. Now its
particularly necessary to behave nicely and genteelly, that all may
see that you are well-born children. I said at the time that the bodice
should be cut longer, and made of two widths. It was your fault, Sonia,
with your advice to make it shorter, and now you see the child is quite
deformed by it.... Why, youre all crying again! Whats the matter,
stupids? Come, Kolya, begin. Make haste, make haste! Oh, what an
unbearable child!

Cinq sous, cinq sous.

A policeman again! What do you want?

A policeman was indeed forcing his way through the crowd. But at that
moment a gentleman in civilian uniform and an overcoat--a solid-looking
official of about fifty with a decoration on his neck (which delighted
Katerina Ivanovna and had its effect on the policeman)--approached and
without a word handed her a green three-rouble note. His face wore
a look of genuine sympathy. Katerina Ivanovna took it and gave him a
polite, even ceremonious, bow.

I thank you, honoured sir, she began loftily. The causes that have
induced us (take the money, Polenka: you see there are generous and
honourable people who are ready to help a poor gentlewoman in distress).
You see, honoured sir, these orphans of good family--I might even say of
aristocratic connections--and that wretch of a general sat eating
grouse... and stamped at my disturbing him. Your excellency, I said,
protect the orphans, for you knew my late husband, Semyon Zaharovitch,
and on the very day of his death the basest of scoundrels slandered his
only daughter.... That policeman again! Protect me, she cried to the
official. Why is that policeman edging up to me? We have only just run
away from one of them. What do you want, fool?

Its forbidden in the streets. You mustnt make a disturbance.

Its youre making a disturbance. Its just the same as if I were
grinding an organ. What business is it of yours?

You have to get a licence for an organ, and you havent got one, and in
that way you collect a crowd. Where do you lodge?

What, a license? wailed Katerina Ivanovna. I buried my husband
to-day. What need of a license?

Calm yourself, madam, calm yourself, began the official. Come along;
I will escort you.... This is no place for you in the crowd. You are
ill.

Honoured sir, honoured sir, you dont know, screamed Katerina
Ivanovna. We are going to the Nevsky.... Sonia, Sonia! Where is she?
She is crying too! Whats the matter with you all? Kolya, Lida, where
are you going? she cried suddenly in alarm. Oh, silly children! Kolya,
Lida, where are they off to?...

Kolya and Lida, scared out of their wits by the crowd, and their
mothers mad pranks, suddenly seized each other by the hand, and ran off
at the sight of the policeman who wanted to take them away somewhere.
Weeping and wailing, poor Katerina Ivanovna ran after them. She was
a piteous and unseemly spectacle, as she ran, weeping and panting for
breath. Sonia and Polenka rushed after them.

Bring them back, bring them back, Sonia! Oh stupid, ungrateful
children!... Polenka! catch them.... Its for your sakes I...

She stumbled as she ran and fell down.

Shes cut herself, shes bleeding! Oh, dear! cried Sonia, bending over
her.

All ran up and crowded around. Raskolnikov and Lebeziatnikov were the
first at her side, the official too hastened up, and behind him the
policeman who muttered, Bother! with a gesture of impatience, feeling
that the job was going to be a troublesome one.

Pass on! Pass on! he said to the crowd that pressed forward.

Shes dying, someone shouted.

Shes gone out of her mind, said another.

Lord have mercy upon us, said a woman, crossing herself. Have they
caught the little girl and the boy? Theyre being brought back, the
elder ones got them.... Ah, the naughty imps!

When they examined Katerina Ivanovna carefully, they saw that she had
not cut herself against a stone, as Sonia thought, but that the blood
that stained the pavement red was from her chest.

Ive seen that before, muttered the official to Raskolnikov and
Lebeziatnikov; thats consumption; the blood flows and chokes the
patient. I saw the same thing with a relative of my own not long ago...
nearly a pint of blood, all in a minute.... Whats to be done though?
She is dying.

This way, this way, to my room! Sonia implored. I live here!... See,
that house, the second from here.... Come to me, make haste, she turned
from one to the other. Send for the doctor! Oh, dear!

Thanks to the officials efforts, this plan was adopted, the policeman
even helping to carry Katerina Ivanovna. She was carried to Sonias
room, almost unconscious, and laid on the bed. The blood was still
flowing, but she seemed to be coming to herself. Raskolnikov,
Lebeziatnikov, and the official accompanied Sonia into the room and were
followed by the policeman, who first drove back the crowd which followed
to the very door. Polenka came in holding Kolya and Lida, who
were trembling and weeping. Several persons came in too from the
Kapernaumovs room; the landlord, a lame one-eyed man of strange
appearance with whiskers and hair that stood up like a brush, his
wife, a woman with an everlastingly scared expression, and several
open-mouthed children with wonder-struck faces. Among these,
Svidrigalov suddenly made his appearance. Raskolnikov looked at him
with surprise, not understanding where he had come from and not having
noticed him in the crowd. A doctor and priest wore spoken of. The
official whispered to Raskolnikov that he thought it was too late now
for the doctor, but he ordered him to be sent for. Kapernaumov ran
himself.

Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna had regained her breath. The bleeding ceased
for a time. She looked with sick but intent and penetrating eyes at
Sonia, who stood pale and trembling, wiping the sweat from her brow with
a handkerchief. At last she asked to be raised. They sat her up on the
bed, supporting her on both sides.

Where are the children? she said in a faint voice. Youve brought
them, Polenka? Oh the sillies! Why did you run away.... Och!

Once more her parched lips were covered with blood. She moved her eyes,
looking about her.

So thats how you live, Sonia! Never once have I been in your room.

She looked at her with a face of suffering.

We have been your ruin, Sonia. Polenka, Lida, Kolya, come here! Well,
here they are, Sonia, take them all! I hand them over to you, Ive had
enough! The ball is over. (Cough!) Lay me down, let me die in peace.

They laid her back on the pillow.

What, the priest? I dont want him. You havent got a rouble to spare.
I have no sins. God must forgive me without that. He knows how I have
suffered.... And if He wont forgive me, I dont care!

She sank more and more into uneasy delirium. At times she shuddered,
turned her eyes from side to side, recognised everyone for a minute,
but at once sank into delirium again. Her breathing was hoarse and
difficult, there was a sort of rattle in her throat.

I said to him, your excellency, she ejaculated, gasping after each
word. That Amalia Ludwigovna, ah! Lida, Kolya, hands on your hips,
make haste! _Glissez, glissez! pas de basque!_ Tap with your heels, be a
graceful child!

_Du hast Diamanten und Perlen_

What next? Thats the thing to sing.

_Du hast die schnsten Augen Mdchen, was willst du mehr?_

What an idea! _Was willst du mehr?_ What things the fool invents! Ah,
yes!

In the heat of midday in the vale of Dagestan.

Ah, how I loved it! I loved that song to distraction, Polenka! Your
father, you know, used to sing it when we were engaged.... Oh those
days! Oh thats the thing for us to sing! How does it go? Ive
forgotten. Remind me! How was it?

She was violently excited and tried to sit up. At last, in a horribly
hoarse, broken voice, she began, shrieking and gasping at every word,
with a look of growing terror.

In the heat of midday!... in the vale!... of Dagestan!... With lead in
my breast!...

Your excellency! she wailed suddenly with a heart-rending scream and
a flood of tears, protect the orphans! You have been their fathers
guest... one may say aristocratic.... She started, regaining
consciousness, and gazed at all with a sort of terror, but at once
recognised Sonia.

Sonia, Sonia! she articulated softly and caressingly, as though
surprised to find her there. Sonia darling, are you here, too?

They lifted her up again.

Enough! Its over! Farewell, poor thing! I am done for! I am broken!
 she cried with vindictive despair, and her head fell heavily back on the
pillow.

She sank into unconsciousness again, but this time it did not last long.
Her pale, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her mouth fell open, her leg
moved convulsively, she gave a deep, deep sigh and died.

Sonia fell upon her, flung her arms about her, and remained motionless
with her head pressed to the dead womans wasted bosom. Polenka threw
herself at her mothers feet, kissing them and weeping violently. Though
Kolya and Lida did not understand what had happened, they had a feeling
that it was something terrible; they put their hands on each others
little shoulders, stared straight at one another and both at once opened
their mouths and began screaming. They were both still in their fancy
dress; one in a turban, the other in the cap with the ostrich feather.

And how did the certificate of merit come to be on the bed beside
Katerina Ivanovna? It lay there by the pillow; Raskolnikov saw it.

He walked away to the window. Lebeziatnikov skipped up to him.

She is dead, he said.

Rodion Romanovitch, I must have two words with you, said Svidrigalov,
coming up to them.

Lebeziatnikov at once made room for him and delicately withdrew.
Svidrigalov drew Raskolnikov further away.

I will undertake all the arrangements, the funeral and that. You know
its a question of money and, as I told you, I have plenty to spare. I
will put those two little ones and Polenka into some good orphan asylum,
and I will settle fifteen hundred roubles to be paid to each on coming
of age, so that Sofya Semyonovna need have no anxiety about them. And I
will pull her out of the mud too, for she is a good girl, isnt she? So
tell Avdotya Romanovna that that is how I am spending her ten thousand.

What is your motive for such benevolence? asked Raskolnikov.

Ah! you sceptical person! laughed Svidrigalov. I told you I had no
need of that money. Wont you admit that its simply done from humanity?
She wasnt a louse, you know (he pointed to the corner where the
dead woman lay), was she, like some old pawnbroker woman? Come, youll
agree, is Luzhin to go on living, and doing wicked things or is she to
die? And if I didnt help them, Polenka would go the same way.

He said this with an air of a sort of gay winking slyness, keeping his
eyes fixed on Raskolnikov, who turned white and cold, hearing his own
phrases, spoken to Sonia. He quickly stepped back and looked wildly at
Svidrigalov.

How do you know? he whispered, hardly able to breathe.

Why, I lodge here at Madame Resslichs, the other side of the wall.
Here is Kapernaumov, and there lives Madame Resslich, an old and devoted
friend of mine. I am a neighbour.

You?

Yes, continued Svidrigalov, shaking with laughter. I assure you
on my honour, dear Rodion Romanovitch, that you have interested me
enormously. I told you we should become friends, I foretold it. Well,
here we have. And you will see what an accommodating person I am. Youll
see that you can get on with me!




PART VI



