 CHAPTER XLIII.
WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW THE ARTFUL DODGER GOT INTO TROUBLE


And so it was you that was your own friend, was it? asked Mr.
Claypole, otherwise Bolter, when, by virtue of the compact entered into
between them, he had removed next day to Fagins house. Cod, I thought
as much last night!

Every mans his own friend, my dear, replied Fagin, with his most
insinuating grin. He hasnt as good a one as himself anywhere.

Except sometimes, replied Morris Bolter, assuming the air of a man of
the world. Some people are nobodys enemies but their own, yer know.

Dont believe that, said Fagin. When a mans his own enemy, its
only because hes too much his own friend; not because hes careful for
everybody but himself. Pooh! pooh! There aint such a thing in nature.

There oughnt to be, if there is, replied Mr. Bolter.

That stands to reason. Some conjurers say that number three is the
magic number, and some say number seven. Its neither, my friend,
neither. Its number one.

Ha! ha! cried Mr. Bolter. Number one for ever.

In a little community like ours, my dear, said Fagin, who felt it
necessary to qualify this position, we have a general number one,
without considering me too as the same, and all the other young
people.

Oh, the devil! exclaimed Mr. Bolter.

You see, pursued Fagin, affecting to disregard this interruption, we
are so mixed up together, and identified in our interests, that it must
be so. For instance, its your object to take care of number
onemeaning yourself.

Certainly, replied Mr. Bolter. Yer about right there.

Well! You cant take care of yourself, number one, without taking care
of me, number one.

Number two, you mean, said Mr. Bolter, who was largely endowed with
the quality of selfishness.

No, I dont! retorted Fagin. Im of the same importance to you, as
you are to yourself.

I say, interrupted Mr. Bolter, yer a very nice man, and Im very
fond of yer; but we aint quite so thick together, as all that comes
to.

Only think, said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders, and stretching out
his hands; only consider. Youve done whats a very pretty thing, and
what I love you for doing; but what at the same time would put the
cravat round your throat, thats so very easily tied and so very
difficult to unloosein plain English, the halter!

Mr. Bolter put his hand to his neckerchief, as if he felt it
inconveniently tight; and murmured an assent, qualified in tone but not
in substance.

The gallows, continued Fagin, the gallows, my dear, is an ugly
finger-post, which points out a very short and sharp turning that has
stopped many a bold fellows career on the broad highway. To keep in
the easy road, and keep it at a distance, is object number one with
you.

Of course it is, replied Mr. Bolter. What do yer talk about such
things for?

Only to show you my meaning clearly, said the Jew, raising his
eyebrows. To be able to do that, you depend upon me. To keep my little
business all snug, I depend upon you. The first is your number one, the
second my number one. The more you value your number one, the more
careful you must be of mine; so we come at last to what I told you at
firstthat a regard for number one holds us all together, and must do
so, unless we would all go to pieces in company.

Thats true, rejoined Mr. Bolter, thoughtfully. Oh! yer a cunning
old codger!

Mr. Fagin saw, with delight, that this tribute to his powers was no
mere compliment, but that he had really impressed his recruit with a
sense of his wily genius, which it was most important that he should
entertain in the outset of their acquaintance. To strengthen an
impression so desirable and useful, he followed up the blow by
acquainting him, in some detail, with the magnitude and extent of his
operations; blending truth and fiction together, as best served his
purpose; and bringing both to bear, with so much art, that Mr. Bolters
respect visibly increased, and became tempered, at the same time, with
a degree of wholesome fear, which it was highly desirable to awaken.

Its this mutual trust we have in each other that consoles me under
heavy losses, said Fagin. My best hand was taken from me, yesterday
morning.

You dont mean to say he died? cried Mr. Bolter.

No, no, replied Fagin, not so bad as that. Not quite so bad.

What, I suppose he was

Wanted, interposed Fagin. Yes, he was wanted.

Very particular? inquired Mr. Bolter.

No, replied Fagin, not very. He was charged with attempting to pick
a pocket, and they found a silver snuff-box on him,his own, my dear,
his own, for he took snuff himself, and was very fond of it. They
remanded him till today, for they thought they knew the owner. Ah! he
was worth fifty boxes, and Id give the price of as many to have him
back. You should have known the Dodger, my dear; you should have known
the Dodger.

Well, but I shall know him, I hope; dont yer think so? said Mr.
Bolter.

Im doubtful about it, replied Fagin, with a sigh. If they dont get
any fresh evidence, itll only be a summary conviction, and we shall
have him back again after six weeks or so; but, if they do, its a case
of lagging. They know what a clever lad he is; hell be a lifer.
Theyll make the Artful nothing less than a lifer.

What do you mean by lagging and a lifer? demanded Mr. Bolter. Whats
the good of talking in that way to me; why dont yer speak so as I can
understand yer?

Fagin was about to translate these mysterious expressions into the
vulgar tongue; and, being interpreted, Mr. Bolter would have been
informed that they represented that combination of words,
transportation for life, when the dialogue was cut short by the entry
of Master Bates, with his hands in his breeches-pockets, and his face
twisted into a look of semi-comical woe.

Its all up, Fagin, said Charley, when he and his new companion had
been made known to each other.

What do you mean?

Theyve found the gentleman as owns the box; two or three mores a
coming to dentify him; and the Artfuls booked for a passage out,
replied Master Bates. I must have a full suit of mourning, Fagin, and
a hatband, to wisit him in, afore he sets out upon his travels. To
think of Jack Dawkinslummy Jackthe Dodgerthe Artful Dodgergoing
abroad for a common twopenny-halfpenny sneeze-box! I never thought hed
a done it under a gold watch, chain, and seals, at the lowest. Oh, why
didnt he rob some rich old gentleman of all his walables, and go out
as a gentleman, and not like a common prig, without no honour nor
glory!

With this expression of feeling for his unfortunate friend, Master
Bates sat himself on the nearest chair with an aspect of chagrin and
despondency.

What do you talk about his having neither honour nor glory for!
exclaimed Fagin, darting an angry look at his pupil. Wasnt he always
the top-sawyer among you all! Is there one of you that could touch him
or come near him on any scent! Eh?

Not one, replied Master Bates, in a voice rendered husky by regret;
not one.

Then what do you talk of? replied Fagin angrily; what are you
blubbering for?

Cause it isnt on the rec-ord, is it? said Charley, chafed into
perfect defiance of his venerable friend by the current of his regrets;
cause it cant come out in the dictment; cause nobody will never
know half of what he was. How will he stand in the Newgate Calendar?
Praps not be there at all. Oh, my eye, my eye, wot a blow it is!

Ha! ha! cried Fagin, extending his right hand, and turning to Mr.
Bolter in a fit of chuckling which shook him as though he had the
palsy; see what a pride they take in their profession, my dear. Aint
it beautiful?

Mr. Bolter nodded assent, and Fagin, after contemplating the grief of
Charley Bates for some seconds with evident satisfaction, stepped up to
that young gentleman and patted him on the shoulder.

Never mind, Charley, said Fagin soothingly; itll come out, itll be
sure to come out. Theyll all know what a clever fellow he was; hell
show it himself, and not disgrace his old pals and teachers. Think how
young he is too! What a distinction, Charley, to be lagged at his time
of life!

Well, it is a honour that is! said Charley, a little consoled.

He shall have all he wants, continued the Jew. He shall be kept in
the Stone Jug, Charley, like a gentleman. Like a gentleman! With his
beer every day, and money in his pocket to pitch and toss with, if he
cant spend it.

No, shall he though? cried Charley Bates.

Ay, that he shall, replied Fagin, and well have a big-wig, Charley:
one thats got the greatest gift of the gab: to carry on his defence;
and he shall make a speech for himself too, if he likes; and well read
it all in the papersArtful Dodgershrieks of laughterhere the court
was convulsedeh, Charley, eh?

Ha! ha! laughed Master Bates, what a lark that would be, wouldnt
it, Fagin? I say, how the Artful would bother em wouldnt he?

Would! cried Fagin. He shallhe will!

Ah, to be sure, so he will, repeated Charley, rubbing his hands.

I think I see him now, cried the Jew, bending his eyes upon his
pupil.

So do I, cried Charley Bates. Ha! ha! ha! so do I. I see it all
afore me, upon my soul I do, Fagin. What a game! What a regular game!
All the big-wigs trying to look solemn, and Jack Dawkins addressing of
em as intimate and comfortable as if he was the judges own son making
a speech arter dinnerha! ha! ha!

In fact, Mr. Fagin had so well humoured his young friends eccentric
disposition, that Master Bates, who had at first been disposed to
consider the imprisoned Dodger rather in the light of a victim, now
looked upon him as the chief actor in a scene of most uncommon and
exquisite humour, and felt quite impatient for the arrival of the time
when his old companion should have so favourable an opportunity of
displaying his abilities.

We must know how he gets on today, by some handy means or other,
said Fagin. Let me think.

Shall I go? asked Charley.

Not for the world, replied Fagin. Are you mad, my dear, stark mad,
that youd walk into the very place whereNo, Charley, no. One is
enough to lose at a time.

You dont mean to go yourself, I suppose? said Charley with a
humorous leer.

That wouldnt quite fit, replied Fagin shaking his head.

Then why dont you send this new cove? asked Master Bates, laying his
hand on Noahs arm. Nobody knows him.

Why, if he didnt mind observed Fagin.

Mind! interposed Charley. What should he have to mind?

Really nothing, my dear, said Fagin, turning to Mr. Bolter, really
nothing.

Oh, I dare say about that, yer know, observed Noah, backing towards
the door, and shaking his head with a kind of sober alarm. No, nonone
of that. Its not in my department, that aint.

Wot department has he got, Fagin? inquired Master Bates, surveying
Noahs lank form with much disgust. The cutting away when theres
anything wrong, and the eating all the wittles when theres everything
right; is that his branch?

Never mind, retorted Mr. Bolter; and dont yer take liberties with
yer superiors, little boy, or yerll find yerself in the wrong shop.

Master Bates laughed so vehemently at this magnificent threat, that it
was some time before Fagin could interpose, and represent to Mr. Bolter
that he incurred no possible danger in visiting the police-office;
that, inasmuch as no account of the little affair in which he had
engaged, nor any description of his person, had yet been forwarded to
the metropolis, it was very probable that he was not even suspected of
having resorted to it for shelter; and that, if he were properly
disguised, it would be as safe a spot for him to visit as any in
London, inasmuch as it would be, of all places, the very last, to which
he could be supposed likely to resort of his own free will.

Persuaded, in part, by these representations, but overborne in a much
greater degree by his fear of Fagin, Mr. Bolter at length consented,
with a very bad grace, to undertake the expedition. By Fagins
directions, he immediately substituted for his own attire, a waggoners
frock, velveteen breeches, and leather leggings: all of which articles
the Jew had at hand. He was likewise furnished with a felt hat well
garnished with turnpike tickets; and a carters whip. Thus equipped, he
was to saunter into the office, as some country fellow from Covent
Garden market might be supposed to do for the gratification of his
curiousity; and as he was as awkward, ungainly, and raw-boned a fellow
as need be, Mr. Fagin had no fear but that he would look the part to
perfection.

These arrangements completed, he was informed of the necessary signs
and tokens by which to recognise the Artful Dodger, and was conveyed by
Master Bates through dark and winding ways to within a very short
distance of Bow Street. Having described the precise situation of the
office, and accompanied it with copious directions how he was to walk
straight up the passage, and when he got into the side, and pull off
his hat as he went into the room, Charley Bates bade him hurry on
alone, and promised to bide his return on the spot of their parting.

Noah Claypole, or Morris Bolter as the reader pleases, punctually
followed the directions he had received, whichMaster Bates being
pretty well acquainted with the localitywere so exact that he was
enabled to gain the magisterial presence without asking any question,
or meeting with any interruption by the way.

He found himself jostled among a crowd of people, chiefly women, who
were huddled together in a dirty frowsy room, at the upper end of which
was a raised platform railed off from the rest, with a dock for the
prisoners on the left hand against the wall, a box for the witnesses in
the middle, and a desk for the magistrates on the right; the awful
locality last named, being screened off by a partition which concealed
the bench from the common gaze, and left the vulgar to imagine (if they
could) the full majesty of justice.

There were only a couple of women in the dock, who were nodding to
their admiring friends, while the clerk read some depositions to a
couple of policemen and a man in plain clothes who leant over the
table. A jailer stood reclining against the dock-rail, tapping his nose
listlessly with a large key, except when he repressed an undue tendency
to conversation among the idlers, by proclaiming silence; or looked
sternly up to bid some woman Take that baby out, when the gravity of
justice was disturbed by feeble cries, half-smothered in the mothers
shawl, from some meagre infant. The room smelt close and unwholesome;
the walls were dirt-discoloured; and the ceiling blackened. There was
an old smoky bust over the mantel-shelf, and a dusty clock above the
dockthe only thing present, that seemed to go on as it ought; for
depravity, or poverty, or an habitual acquaintance with both, had left
a taint on all the animate matter, hardly less unpleasant than the
thick greasy scum on every inanimate object that frowned upon it.

Noah looked eagerly about him for the Dodger; but although there were
several women who would have done very well for that distinguished
characters mother or sister, and more than one man who might be
supposed to bear a strong resemblance to his father, nobody at all
answering the description given him of Mr. Dawkins was to be seen. He
waited in a state of much suspense and uncertainty until the women,
being committed for trial, went flaunting out; and then was quickly
relieved by the appearance of another prisoner who he felt at once
could be no other than the object of his visit.

It was indeed Mr. Dawkins, who, shuffling into the office with the big
coat sleeves tucked up as usual, his left hand in his pocket, and his
hat in his right hand, preceded the jailer, with a rolling gait
altogether indescribable, and, taking his place in the dock, requested
in an audible voice to know what he was placed in that ere disgraceful
sitivation for.

Hold your tongue, will you? said the jailer.

Im an Englishman, aint I? rejoined the Dodger. Where are my
priwileges?

Youll get your privileges soon enough, retorted the jailer, and
pepper with em.

Well see wot the Secretary of State for the Home Affairs has got to
say to the beaks, if I dont, replied Mr. Dawkins. Now then! Wot is
this here business? I shall thank the madgstrates to dispose of this
here little affair, and not to keep me while they read the paper, for
Ive got an appointment with a genelman in the City, and as I am a man
of my word and wery punctual in business matters, hell go away if I
aint there to my time, and then praps ther wont be an action for
damage against them as kep me away. Oh no, certainly not!

At this point, the Dodger, with a show of being very particular with a
view to proceedings to be had thereafter, desired the jailer to
communicate the names of them two files as was on the bench. Which so
tickled the spectators, that they laughed almost as heartily as Master
Bates could have done if he had heard the request.

Silence there! cried the jailer.

What is this? inquired one of the magistrates.

A pick-pocketing case, your worship.

Has the boy ever been here before?

He ought to have been, a many times, replied the jailer. He has been
pretty well everywhere else. _I_ know him well, your worship.

Oh! you know me, do you? cried the Artful, making a note of the
statement. Wery good. Thats a case of deformation of character, any
way.

Here there was another laugh, and another cry of silence.

Now then, where are the witnesses? said the clerk.

Ah! thats right, added the Dodger. Where are they? I should like to
see em.

This wish was immediately gratified, for a policeman stepped forward
who had seen the prisoner attempt the pocket of an unknown gentleman in
a crowd, and indeed take a handkerchief therefrom, which, being a very
old one, he deliberately put back again, after trying it on his own
countenance. For this reason, he took the Dodger into custody as soon
as he could get near him, and the said Dodger, being searched, had upon
his person a silver snuff-box, with the owners name engraved upon the
lid. This gentleman had been discovered on reference to the Court
Guide, and being then and there present, swore that the snuff-box was
his, and that he had missed it on the previous day, the moment he had
disengaged himself from the crowd before referred to. He had also
remarked a young gentleman in the throng, particularly active in making
his way about, and that young gentleman was the prisoner before him.

Have you anything to ask this witness, boy? said the magistrate.

I wouldnt abase myself by descending to hold no conversation with
him, replied the Dodger.

Have you anything to say at all?

Do you hear his worship ask if youve anything to say? inquired the
jailer, nudging the silent Dodger with his elbow.

I beg your pardon, said the Dodger, looking up with an air of
abstraction. Did you redress yourself to me, my man?

I never see such an out-and-out young wagabond, your worship,
observed the officer with a grin. Do you mean to say anything, you
young shaver?

No, replied the Dodger, not here, for this aint the shop for
justice: besides which, my attorney is a-breakfasting this morning with
the Wice President of the House of Commons; but I shall have something
to say elsewhere, and so will he, and so will a wery numerous and
spectable circle of acquaintance asll make them beaks wish theyd
never been born, or that theyd got their footmen to hang em up to
their own hat-pegs, afore they let em come out this morning to try it
on upon me. Ill

There! Hes fully committed! interposed the clerk. Take him away.

Come on, said the jailer.

Oh ah! Ill come on, replied the Dodger, brushing his hat with the
palm of his hand. Ah! (to the Bench) its no use your looking
frightened; I wont show you no mercy, not a haporth of it. _Youll_
pay for this, my fine fellers. I wouldnt be you for something! I
wouldnt go free, now, if you was to fall down on your knees and ask
me. Here, carry me off to prison! Take me away!

With these last words, the Dodger suffered himself to be led off by the
collar; threatening, till he got into the yard, to make a parliamentary
business of it; and then grinning in the officers face, with great
glee and self-approval.

Having seen him locked up by himself in a little cell, Noah made the
best of his way back to where he had left Master Bates. After waiting
here some time, he was joined by that young gentleman, who had
prudently abstained from showing himself until he had looked carefully
abroad from a snug retreat, and ascertained that his new friend had not
been followed by any impertinent person.

The two hastened back together, to bear to Mr. Fagin the animating news
that the Dodger was doing full justice to his bringing-up, and
establishing for himself a glorious reputation.




