 CHAPTER XXXIX.
INTRODUCES SOME RESPECTABLE CHARACTERS WITH WHOM THE READER IS ALREADY
ACQUAINTED, AND SHOWS HOW MONKS AND THE JEW LAID THEIR WORTHY HEADS
TOGETHER


On the evening following that upon which the three worthies mentioned
in the last chapter, disposed of their little matter of business as
therein narrated, Mr. William Sikes, awakening from a nap, drowsily
growled forth an inquiry what time of night it was.

The room in which Mr. Sikes propounded this question, was not one of
those he had tenanted, previous to the Chertsey expedition, although it
was in the same quarter of the town, and was situated at no great
distance from his former lodgings. It was not, in appearance, so
desirable a habitation as his old quarters: being a mean and
badly-furnished apartment, of very limited size; lighted only by one
small window in the shelving roof, and abutting on a close and dirty
lane. Nor were there wanting other indications of the good gentlemans
having gone down in the world of late: for a great scarcity of
furniture, and total absence of comfort, together with the
disappearance of all such small moveables as spare clothes and linen,
bespoke a state of extreme poverty; while the meagre and attenuated
condition of Mr. Sikes himself would have fully confirmed these
symptoms, if they had stood in any need of corroboration.

The housebreaker was lying on the bed, wrapped in his white great-coat,
by way of dressing-gown, and displaying a set of features in no degree
improved by the cadaverous hue of illness, and the addition of a soiled
nightcap, and a stiff, black beard of a weeks growth. The dog sat at
the bedside: now eyeing his master with a wistful look, and now
pricking his ears, and uttering a low growl as some noise in the
street, or in the lower part of the house, attracted his attention.
Seated by the window, busily engaged in patching an old waistcoat which
formed a portion of the robbers ordinary dress, was a female: so pale
and reduced with watching and privation, that there would have been
considerable difficulty in recognising her as the same Nancy who has
already figured in this tale, but for the voice in which she replied to
Mr. Sikess question.

Not long gone seven, said the girl. How do you feel tonight, Bill?

As weak as water, replied Mr. Sikes, with an imprecation on his eyes
and limbs. Here; lend us a hand, and let me get off this thundering
bed anyhow.

Illness had not improved Mr. Sikess temper; for, as the girl raised
him up and led him to a chair, he muttered various curses on her
awkwardness, and struck her.

Whining are you? said Sikes. Come! Dont stand snivelling there. If
you cant do anything better than that, cut off altogether. Dye hear
me?

I hear you, replied the girl, turning her face aside, and forcing a
laugh. What fancy have you got in your head now?

Oh! youve thought better of it, have you? growled Sikes, marking the
tear which trembled in her eye. All the better for you, you have.

Why, you dont mean to say, youd be hard upon me tonight, Bill,
said the girl, laying her hand upon his shoulder.

No! cried Mr. Sikes. Why not?

Such a number of nights, said the girl, with a touch of womans
tenderness, which communicated something like sweetness of tone, even
to her voice: such a number of nights as Ive been patient with you,
nursing and caring for you, as if you had been a child: and this the
first that Ive seen you like yourself; you wouldnt have served me as
you did just now, if youd thought of that, would you? Come, come; say
you wouldnt.

Well, then, rejoined Mr. Sikes, I wouldnt. Why, damme, now, the
girlss whining again!

Its nothing, said the girl, throwing herself into a chair. Dont
you seem to mind me. Itll soon be over.

Whatll be over? demanded Mr. Sikes in a savage voice. What foolery
are you up to, now, again? Get up and bustle about, and dont come over
me with your womans nonsense.

At any other time, this remonstrance, and the tone in which it was
delivered, would have had the desired effect; but the girl being really
weak and exhausted, dropped her head over the back of the chair, and
fainted, before Mr. Sikes could get out a few of the appropriate oaths
with which, on similar occasions, he was accustomed to garnish his
threats. Not knowing, very well, what to do, in this uncommon
emergency; for Miss Nancys hysterics were usually of that violent kind
which the patient fights and struggles out of, without much assistance;
Mr. Sikes tried a little blasphemy: and finding that mode of treatment
wholly ineffectual, called for assistance.

Whats the matter here, my dear? said Fagin, looking in.

Lend a hand to the girl, cant you? replied Sikes impatiently. Dont
stand chattering and grinning at me!

With an exclamation of surprise, Fagin hastened to the girls
assistance, while Mr. John Dawkins (otherwise the Artful Dodger), who
had followed his venerable friend into the room, hastily deposited on
the floor a bundle with which he was laden; and snatching a bottle from
the grasp of Master Charles Bates who came close at his heels, uncorked
it in a twinkling with his teeth, and poured a portion of its contents
down the patients throat: previously taking a taste, himself, to
prevent mistakes.

Give her a whiff of fresh air with the bellows, Charley, said Mr.
Dawkins; and you slap her hands, Fagin, while Bill undoes the
petticuts.

These united restoratives, administered with great energy: especially
that department consigned to Master Bates, who appeared to consider his
share in the proceedings, a piece of unexampled pleasantry: were not
long in producing the desired effect. The girl gradually recovered her
senses; and, staggering to a chair by the bedside, hid her face upon
the pillow: leaving Mr. Sikes to confront the new comers, in some
astonishment at their unlooked-for appearance.

Why, what evil wind has blowed you here? he asked Fagin.

No evil wind at all, my dear, for evil winds blow nobody any good; and
Ive brought something good with me, that youll be glad to see.
Dodger, my dear, open the bundle; and give Bill the little trifles that
we spent all our money on, this morning.

In compliance with Mr. Fagins request, the Artful untied this bundle,
which was of large size, and formed of an old table-cloth; and handed
the articles it contained, one by one, to Charley Bates: who placed
them on the table, with various encomiums on their rarity and
excellence.

Sitch a rabbit pie, Bill, exclaimed that young gentleman, disclosing
to view a huge pasty; sitch delicate creeturs, with sitch tender
limbs, Bill, that the wery bones melt in your mouth, and theres no
occasion to pick em; half a pound of seven and six-penny green, so
precious strong that if you mix it with biling water, itll go nigh to
blow the lid of the tea-pot off; a pound and a half of moist sugar that
the niggers didnt work at all at, afore they got it up to sitch a
pitch of goodness,oh no! Two half-quartern brans; pound of best fresh;
piece of double Gloster; and, to wind up all, some of the richest sort
you ever lushed!

Uttering this last panegyric, Master Bates produced, from one of his
extensive pockets, a full-sized wine-bottle, carefully corked; while
Mr. Dawkins, at the same instant, poured out a wine-glassful of raw
spirits from the bottle he carried: which the invalid tossed down his
throat without a moments hesitation.

Ah! said Fagin, rubbing his hands with great satisfaction. Youll
do, Bill; youll do now.

Do! exclaimed Mr. Sikes; I might have been done for, twenty times
over, afore youd have done anything to help me. What do you mean by
leaving a man in this state, three weeks and more, you false-hearted
wagabond?

Only hear him, boys! said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders. And us
come to bring him all these beau-ti-ful things.

The things is well enough in their way, observed Mr. Sikes: a little
soothed as he glanced over the table; but what have you got to say for
yourself, why you should leave me here, down in the mouth, health,
blunt, and everything else; and take no more notice of me, all this
mortal time, than if I was that ere dog.Drive him down, Charley!

I never see such a jolly dog as that, cried Master Bates, doing as he
was desired. Smelling the grub like a old lady a going to market! Hed
make his fortun on the stage that dog would, and rewive the drayma
besides.

Hold your din, cried Sikes, as the dog retreated under the bed: still
growling angrily. What have you got to say for yourself, you withered
old fence, eh?

I was away from London, a week and more, my dear, on a plant, replied
the Jew.

And what about the other fortnight? demanded Sikes. What about the
other fortnight that youve left me lying here, like a sick rat in his
hole?

I couldnt help it, Bill. I cant go into a long explanation before
company; but I couldnt help it, upon my honour.

Upon your what? growled Sikes, with excessive disgust. Here! Cut me
off a piece of that pie, one of you boys, to take the taste of that out
of my mouth, or itll choke me dead.

Dont be out of temper, my dear, urged Fagin, submissively. I have
never forgot you, Bill; never once.

No! Ill pound it that you hant, replied Sikes, with a bitter grin.
Youve been scheming and plotting away, every hour that I have laid
shivering and burning here; and Bill was to do this; and Bill was to do
that; and Bill was to do it all, dirt cheap, as soon as he got well:
and was quite poor enough for your work. If it hadnt been for the
girl, I might have died.

There now, Bill, remonstrated Fagin, eagerly catching at the word.
If it hadnt been for the girl! Who but poor ould Fagin was the means
of your having such a handy girl about you?

He says true enough there! said Nancy, coming hastily forward. Let
him be; let him be.

Nancys appearance gave a new turn to the conversation; for the boys,
receiving a sly wink from the wary old Jew, began to ply her with
liquor: of which, however, she took very sparingly; while Fagin,
assuming an unusual flow of spirits, gradually brought Mr. Sikes into a
better temper, by affecting to regard his threats as a little pleasant
banter; and, moreover, by laughing very heartily at one or two rough
jokes, which, after repeated applications to the spirit-bottle, he
condescended to make.

Its all very well, said Mr. Sikes; but I must have some blunt from
you tonight.

I havent a piece of coin about me, replied the Jew.

Then youve got lots at home, retorted Sikes; and I must have some
from there.

Lots! cried Fagin, holding up his hands. I havent so much as would

I dont know how much youve got, and I dare say you hardly know
yourself, as it would take a pretty long time to count it, said Sikes;
but I must have some tonight; and thats flat.

Well, well, said Fagin, with a sigh, Ill send the Artful round
presently.

You wont do nothing of the kind, rejoined Mr. Sikes. The Artfuls a
deal too artful, and would forget to come, or lose his way, or get
dodged by traps and so be perwented, or anything for an excuse, if you
put him up to it. Nancy shall go to the ken and fetch it, to make all
sure; and Ill lie down and have a snooze while shes gone.

After a great deal of haggling and squabbling, Fagin beat down the
amount of the required advance from five pounds to three pounds four
and sixpence: protesting with many solemn asseverations that that would
only leave him eighteen-pence to keep house with; Mr. Sikes sullenly
remarking that if he couldnt get any more he must accompany him home;
with the Dodger and Master Bates put the eatables in the cupboard. The
Jew then, taking leave of his affectionate friend, returned homeward,
attended by Nancy and the boys: Mr. Sikes, meanwhile, flinging himself
on the bed, and composing himself to sleep away the time until the
young ladys return.

In due course, they arrived at Fagins abode, where they found Toby
Crackit and Mr. Chitling intent upon their fifteenth game at cribbage,
which it is scarcely necessary to say the latter gentleman lost, and
with it, his fifteenth and last sixpence: much to the amusement of his
young friends. Mr. Crackit, apparently somewhat ashamed at being found
relaxing himself with a gentleman so much his inferior in station and
mental endowments, yawned, and inquiring after Sikes, took up his hat
to go.

Has nobody been, Toby? asked Fagin.

Not a living leg, answered Mr. Crackit, pulling up his collar; its
been as dull as swipes. You ought to stand something handsome, Fagin,
to recompense me for keeping house so long. Damme, Im as flat as a
juryman; and should have gone to sleep, as fast as Newgate, if I hadnt
had the good natur to amuse this youngster. Horrid dull, Im blessed
if I ant!

With these and other ejaculations of the same kind, Mr. Toby Crackit
swept up his winnings, and crammed them into his waistcoat pocket with
a haughty air, as though such small pieces of silver were wholly
beneath the consideration of a man of his figure; this done, he
swaggered out of the room, with so much elegance and gentility, that
Mr. Chitling, bestowing numerous admiring glances on his legs and boots
till they were out of sight, assured the company that he considered his
acquaintance cheap at fifteen sixpences an interview, and that he
didnt value his losses the snap of his little finger.

Wot a rum chap you are, Tom! said Master Bates, highly amused by this
declaration.

Not a bit of it, replied Mr. Chitling. Am I, Fagin?

A very clever fellow, my dear, said Fagin, patting him on the
shoulder, and winking to his other pupils.

And Mr. Crackit is a heavy swell; ant he, Fagin? asked Tom.

No doubt at all of that, my dear.

And it is a creditable thing to have his acquaintance; ant it,
Fagin? pursued Tom.

Very much so, indeed, my dear. Theyre only jealous, Tom, because he
wont give it to them.

Ah! cried Tom, triumphantly, thats where it is! He has cleaned me
out. But I can go and earn some more, when I like; cant I, Fagin?

To be sure you can, and the sooner you go the better, Tom; so make up
your loss at once, and dont lose any more time. Dodger! Charley! Its
time you were on the lay. Come! Its near ten, and nothing done yet.

In obedience to this hint, the boys, nodding to Nancy, took up their
hats, and left the room; the Dodger and his vivacious friend indulging,
as they went, in many witticisms at the expense of Mr. Chitling; in
whose conduct, it is but justice to say, there was nothing very
conspicuous or peculiar: inasmuch as there are a great number of
spirited young bloods upon town, who pay a much higher price than Mr.
Chitling for being seen in good society: and a great number of fine
gentlemen (composing the good society aforesaid) who established their
reputation upon very much the same footing as flash Toby Crackit.

Now, said Fagin, when they had left the room, Ill go and get you
that cash, Nancy. This is only the key of a little cupboard where I
keep a few odd things the boys get, my dear. I never lock up my money,
for Ive got none to lock up, my dearha! ha! ha!none to lock up. Its
a poor trade, Nancy, and no thanks; but Im fond of seeing the young
people about me; and I bear it all, I bear it all. Hush! he said,
hastily concealing the key in his breast; whos that? Listen!

The girl, who was sitting at the table with her arms folded, appeared
in no way interested in the arrival: or to care whether the person,
whoever he was, came or went: until the murmur of a mans voice reached
her ears. The instant she caught the sound, she tore off her bonnet and
shawl, with the rapidity of lightning, and thrust them under the table.
The Jew, turning round immediately afterwards, she muttered a complaint
of the heat: in a tone of languor that contrasted, very remarkably,
with the extreme haste and violence of this action: which, however, had
been unobserved by Fagin, who had his back towards her at the time.

Bah! he whispered, as though nettled by the interruption; its the
man I expected before; hes coming downstairs. Not a word about the
money while hes here, Nance. He wont stop long. Not ten minutes, my
dear.

Laying his skinny forefinger upon his lip, the Jew carried a candle to
the door, as a mans step was heard upon the stairs without. He reached
it, at the same moment as the visitor, who, coming hastily into the
room, was close upon the girl before he observed her.

It was Monks.

Only one of my young people, said Fagin, observing that Monks drew
back, on beholding a stranger. Dont move, Nancy.

The girl drew closer to the table, and glancing at Monks with an air of
careless levity, withdrew her eyes; but as he turned towards Fagin, she
stole another look; so keen and searching, and full of purpose, that if
there had been any bystander to observe the change, he could hardly
have believed the two looks to have proceeded from the same person.

Any news? inquired Fagin.

Great.

Andandgood? asked Fagin, hesitating as though he feared to vex the
other man by being too sanguine.

Not bad, any way, replied Monks with a smile. I have been prompt
enough this time. Let me have a word with you.

The girl drew closer to the table, and made no offer to leave the room,
although she could see that Monks was pointing to her. The Jew: perhaps
fearing she might say something aloud about the money, if he
endeavoured to get rid of her: pointed upward, and took Monks out of
the room.

Not that infernal hole we were in before, she could hear the man say
as they went upstairs. Fagin laughed; and making some reply which did
not reach her, seemed, by the creaking of the boards, to lead his
companion to the second story.

Before the sound of their footsteps had ceased to echo through the
house, the girl had slipped off her shoes; and drawing her gown loosely
over her head, and muffling her arms in it, stood at the door,
listening with breathless interest. The moment the noise ceased, she
glided from the room; ascended the stairs with incredible softness and
silence; and was lost in the gloom above.

The room remained deserted for a quarter of an hour or more; the girl
glided back with the same unearthly tread; and, immediately afterwards,
the two men were heard descending. Monks went at once into the street;
and the Jew crawled upstairs again for the money. When he returned, the
girl was adjusting her shawl and bonnet, as if preparing to be gone.

Why, Nance! exclaimed the Jew, starting back as he put down the
candle, how pale you are!

Pale! echoed the girl, shading her eyes with her hands, as if to look
steadily at him.

Quite horrible. What have you been doing to yourself?

Nothing that I know of, except sitting in this close place for I dont
know how long and all, replied the girl carelessly. Come! Let me get
back; thats a dear.

With a sigh for every piece of money, Fagin told the amount into her
hand. They parted without more conversation, merely interchanging a
good-night.

When the girl got into the open street, she sat down upon a doorstep;
and seemed, for a few moments, wholly bewildered and unable to pursue
her way. Suddenly she arose; and hurrying on, in a direction quite
opposite to that in which Sikes was awaiting her return, quickened
her pace, until it gradually resolved into a violent run. After
completely exhausting herself, she stopped to take breath: and, as if
suddenly recollecting herself, and deploring her inability to do
something she was bent upon, wrung her hands, and burst into tears.

It might be that her tears relieved her, or that she felt the full
hopelessness of her condition; but she turned back; and hurrying with
nearly as great rapidity in the contrary direction; partly to recover
lost time, and partly to keep pace with the violent current of her own
thoughts: soon reached the dwelling where she had left the
housebreaker.

If she betrayed any agitation, when she presented herself to Mr. Sikes,
he did not observe it; for merely inquiring if she had brought the
money, and receiving a reply in the affirmative, he uttered a growl of
satisfaction, and replacing his head upon the pillow, resumed the
slumbers which her arrival had interrupted.

It was fortunate for her that the possession of money occasioned him so
much employment next day in the way of eating and drinking; and withal
had so beneficial an effect in smoothing down the asperities of his
temper; that he had neither time nor inclination to be very critical
upon her behaviour and deportment. That she had all the abstracted and
nervous manner of one who is on the eve of some bold and hazardous
step, which it has required no common struggle to resolve upon, would
have been obvious to the lynx-eyed Fagin, who would most probably have
taken the alarm at once; but Mr. Sikes lacking the niceties of
discrimination, and being troubled with no more subtle misgivings than
those which resolve themselves into a dogged roughness of behaviour
towards everybody; and being, furthermore, in an unusually amiable
condition, as has been already observed; saw nothing unusual in her
demeanor, and indeed, troubled himself so little about her, that, had
her agitation been far more perceptible than it was, it would have been
very unlikely to have awakened his suspicions.

As that day closed in, the girls excitement increased; and, when night
came on, and she sat by, watching until the housebreaker should drink
himself asleep, there was an unusual paleness in her cheek, and a fire
in her eye, that even Sikes observed with astonishment.

Mr. Sikes being weak from the fever, was lying in bed, taking hot water
with his gin to render it less inflammatory; and had pushed his glass
towards Nancy to be replenished for the third or fourth time, when
these symptoms first struck him.

Why, burn my body! said the man, raising himself on his hands as he
stared the girl in the face. You look like a corpse come to life
again. Whats the matter?

Matter! replied the girl. Nothing. What do you look at me so hard
for?

What foolery is this? demanded Sikes, grasping her by the arm, and
shaking her roughly. What is it? What do you mean? What are you
thinking of?

Of many things, Bill, replied the girl, shivering, and as she did so,
pressing her hands upon her eyes. But, Lord! What odds in that?

The tone of forced gaiety in which the last words were spoken, seemed
to produce a deeper impression on Sikes than the wild and rigid look
which had preceded them.

I tell you wot it is, said Sikes; if you havent caught the fever,
and got it comin on, now, theres something more than usual in the
wind, and something dangerous too. Youre not a-going to. No, damme!
you wouldnt do that!

Do what? asked the girl.

There aint, said Sikes, fixing his eyes upon her, and muttering the
words to himself; there aint a stauncher-hearted gal going, or Id
have cut her throat three months ago. Shes got the fever coming on;
thats it.

Fortifying himself with this assurance, Sikes drained the glass to the
bottom, and then, with many grumbling oaths, called for his physic. The
girl jumped up, with great alacrity; poured it quickly out, but with
her back towards him; and held the vessel to his lips, while he drank
off the contents.

Now, said the robber, come and sit aside of me, and put on your own
face; or Ill alter it so, that you wont know it agin when you do want
it.

The girl obeyed. Sikes, locking her hand in his, fell back upon the
pillow: turning his eyes upon her face. They closed; opened again;
closed once more; again opened. He shifted his position restlessly;
and, after dozing again, and again, for two or three minutes, and as
often springing up with a look of terror, and gazing vacantly about
him, was suddenly stricken, as it were, while in the very attitude of
rising, into a deep and heavy sleep. The grasp of his hand relaxed; the
upraised arm fell languidly by his side; and he lay like one in a
profound trance.

The laudanum has taken effect at last, murmured the girl, as she rose
from the bedside. I may be too late, even now.

She hastily dressed herself in her bonnet and shawl: looking fearfully
round, from time to time, as if, despite the sleeping draught, she
expected every moment to feel the pressure of Sikess heavy hand upon
her shoulder; then, stooping softly over the bed, she kissed the
robbers lips; and then opening and closing the room-door with
noiseless touch, hurried from the house.

A watchman was crying half-past nine, down a dark passage through which
she had to pass, in gaining the main thoroughfare.

Has it long gone the half-hour? asked the girl.

Itll strike the hour in another quarter, said the man: raising his
lantern to her face.

And I cannot get there in less than an hour or more, muttered Nancy:
brushing swiftly past him, and gliding rapidly down the street.

Many of the shops were already closing in the back lanes and avenues
through which she tracked her way, in making from Spitalfields towards
the West-End of London. The clock struck ten, increasing her
impatience. She tore along the narrow pavement: elbowing the passengers
from side to side; and darting almost under the horses heads, crossed
crowded streets, where clusters of persons were eagerly watching their
opportunity to do the like.

The woman is mad! said the people, turning to look after her as she
rushed away.

When she reached the more wealthy quarter of the town, the streets were
comparatively deserted; and here her headlong progress excited a still
greater curiosity in the stragglers whom she hurried past. Some
quickened their pace behind, as though to see whither she was hastening
at such an unusual rate; and a few made head upon her, and looked back,
surprised at her undiminished speed; but they fell off one by one; and
when she neared her place of destination, she was alone.

It was a family hotel in a quiet but handsome street near Hyde Park. As
the brilliant light of the lamp which burnt before its door, guided her
to the spot, the clock struck eleven. She had loitered for a few paces
as though irresolute, and making up her mind to advance; but the sound
determined her, and she stepped into the hall. The porters seat was
vacant. She looked round with an air of incertitude, and advanced
towards the stairs.

Now, young woman! said a smartly-dressed female, looking out from a
door behind her, who do you want here?

A lady who is stopping in this house, answered the girl.

A lady! was the reply, accompanied with a scornful look. What lady?

Miss Maylie, said Nancy.

The young woman, who had by this time, noted her appearance, replied
only by a look of virtuous disdain; and summoned a man to answer her.
To him, Nancy repeated her request.

What name am I to say? asked the waiter.

Its of no use saying any, replied Nancy.

Nor business? said the man.

No, nor that neither, rejoined the girl. I must see the lady.

Come! said the man, pushing her towards the door. None of this. Take
yourself off.

I shall be carried out if I go! said the girl violently; and I can
make that a job that two of you wont like to do. Isnt there anybody
here, she said, looking round, that will see a simple message carried
for a poor wretch like me?

This appeal produced an effect on a good-tempered-faced man-cook, who
with some of the other servants was looking on, and who stepped forward
to interfere.

Take it up for her, Joe; cant you? said this person.

Whats the good? replied the man. You dont suppose the young lady
will see such as her; do you?

This allusion to Nancys doubtful character, raised a vast quantity of
chaste wrath in the bosoms of four housemaids, who remarked, with great
fervour, that the creature was a disgrace to her sex; and strongly
advocated her being thrown, ruthlessly, into the kennel.

Do what you like with me, said the girl, turning to the men again;
but do what I ask you first, and I ask you to give this message for
God Almightys sake.

The soft-hearted cook added his intercession, and the result was that
the man who had first appeared undertook its delivery.

Whats it to be? said the man, with one foot on the stairs.

That a young woman earnestly asks to speak to Miss Maylie alone, said
Nancy; and that if the lady will only hear the first word she has to
say, she will know whether to hear her business, or to have her turned
out of doors as an impostor.

I say, said the man, youre coming it strong!

You give the message, said the girl firmly; and let me hear the
answer.

The man ran upstairs. Nancy remained, pale and almost breathless,
listening with quivering lip to the very audible expressions of scorn,
of which the chaste housemaids were very prolific; and of which they
became still more so, when the man returned, and said the young woman
was to walk upstairs.

Its no good being proper in this world, said the first housemaid.

Brass can do better than the gold what has stood the fire, said the
second.

The third contented herself with wondering what ladies was made of;
and the fourth took the first in a quartette of Shameful! with which
the Dianas concluded.

Regardless of all this: for she had weightier matters at heart: Nancy
followed the man, with trembling limbs, to a small ante-chamber,
lighted by a lamp from the ceiling. Here he left her, and retired.




