CHAPTER XXXVIII. DUSK


_By the Mainmast; Starbuck leaning against it._

My soul is more than matched; shes overmanned; and by a madman!
Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field! But
he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me! I think I
see his impious end; but feel that I must help him to it. Will I, nill
I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me with a cable I have
no knife to cut. Horrible old man! Whos over him, he cries;aye, he
would be a democrat to all above; look, how he lords it over all below!
Oh! I plainly see my miserable office,to obey, rebelling; and worse
yet, to hate with touch of pity! For in his eyes I read some lurid woe
would shrivel me up, had I it. Yet is there hope. Time and tide flow
wide. The hated whale has the round watery world to swim in, as the
small gold-fish has its glassy globe. His heaven-insulting purpose, God
may wedge aside. I would up heart, were it not like lead. But my whole
clocks run down; my heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to
lift again.

[_A burst of revelry from the forecastle._]

Oh, God! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch of
human mothers in them! Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea. The white
whale is their demigorgon. Hark! the infernal orgies! that revelry is
forward! mark the unfaltering silence aft! Methinks it pictures life.
Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay, embattled,
bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where he broods
within his sternward cabin, builded over the dead water of the wake,
and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings. The long howl thrills
me through! Peace! ye revellers, and set the watch! Oh, life! tis in
an hour like this, with soul beat down and held to knowledge,as wild,
untutored things are forced to feedOh, life! tis now that I do feel
the latent horror in thee! but tis not me! that horrors out of me!
and with the soft feeling of the human in me, yet will I try to fight
ye, ye grim, phantom futures! Stand by me, hold me, bind me, O ye
blessed influences!




CHAPTER XXXIX. FIRST NIGHT-WATCH FORE-TOP


(_Stubb solus, and mending a brace._)

Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!Ive been thinking over it ever
since, and that ha, has the final consequence. Why so? Because a
laughs the wisest, easiest answer to all thats queer; and come what
will, one comforts always leftthat unfailing comfort is, its all
predestinated. I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; but to my poor
eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening felt. Be sure
the old Mogul has fixed him, too. I twigged it, knew it; had had the
gift, might readily have prophesied itfor when I clapped my eye upon
his skull I saw it. Well, Stubb, _wise_ Stubbthats my titlewell,
Stubb, what of it, Stubb? Heres a carcase. I know not all that may be
coming, but be it what it will, Ill go to it laughing. Such a waggish
leering as lurks in all your horribles! I feel funny. Fa, la! lirra,
skirra! Whats my juicy little pear at home doing now? Crying its eyes
out?Giving a party to the last arrived harpooneers, I dare say, gay as
a frigates pennant, and so am Ifa, la! lirra, skirra! Oh

Well drink to-night with hearts as light,
    To love, as gay and fleeting
As bubbles that swim, on the beakers brim,
    And break on the lips while meeting.

A brave stave thatwho calls? Mr. Starbuck? Aye, aye, sir(_Aside_)
hes my superior, he has his too, if Im not mistaken.Aye, aye, sir,
just through with this jobcoming.




CHAPTER XL. MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE


HARPOONERS AND SAILORS.
(_Foresail rises and discovers the watch standing, lounging, leaning,
and lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus._)

Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies!
Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain!
    Our captains commanded.

1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Oh, boys, dont be sentimental; its bad for the digestion! Take a
tonic, follow me!

(_Sings, and all follow._)
Our captain stood upon the deck,
    A spy-glass in his hand,
A viewing of those gallant whales
    That blew at every strand.
Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys,
    And by your braces stand,
And well have one of those fine whales,
    Hand, boys, over hand!
So, be cheery, my lads! may your hearts never fail!
While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale!

MATES VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK.
Eight bells there, forward!

2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Avast the chorus! Eight bells there! dye hear, bell-boy? Strike the
bell eight, thou Pip! thou blackling! and let me call the watch. Ive
the sort of mouth for thatthe hogshead mouth. So, so, (_thrusts his
head down the scuttle_,) Starbol-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y! Eight bells there
below! Tumble up!

DUTCH SAILOR.
Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that. I mark this in our
old Moguls wine; its quite as deadening to some as filliping to
others. We sing; they sleepaye, lie down there, like ground-tier
butts. At em again! There, take this copper-pump, and hail em through
it. Tell em to avast dreaming of their lasses. Tell em its the
resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come to judgment. Thats
the waythats it; thy throat aint spoiled with eating Amsterdam
butter.

FRENCH SAILOR.
Hist, boys! lets have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in Blanket
Bay. What say ye? There comes the other watch. Stand by all legs! Pip!
little Pip! hurrah with your tambourine!

PIP.
(_Sulky and sleepy._)
Dont know where it is.

FRENCH SAILOR.
Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. Jig it, men, I say; merrys the
word; hurrah! Damn me, wont you dance? Form, now, Indian-file, and
gallop into the double-shuffle? Throw yourselves! Legs! Legs!

ICELAND SAILOR.
I dont like your floor, maty; its too springy to my taste. Im used
to ice-floors. Im sorry to throw cold water on the subject; but excuse
me.

MALTESE SAILOR.
Me too; wheres your girls? Who but a fool would take his left hand by
his right, and say to himself, how dye do? Partners! I must have
partners!

SICILIAN SAILOR.
Aye; girls and a green!then Ill hop with ye; yea, turn grasshopper!

LONG-ISLAND SAILOR.
Well, well, ye sulkies, theres plenty more of us. Hoe corn when you
may, I say. All legs go to harvest soon. Ah! here comes the music; now
for it!

AZORE SAILOR.
(_Ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle._)
Here you are, Pip; and theres the windlass-bitts; up you mount! Now,
boys!

(_The half of them dance to the tambourine; some go below; some sleep
or lie among the coils of rigging. Oaths a-plenty._)

AZORE SAILOR.
(_Dancing._)
Go it, Pip! Bang it, bell-boy! Rig it, dig it, stig it, quig it,
bell-boy; Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!

PIP.
Jinglers, you say?there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.

CHINA SAILOR.
Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of thyself.

FRENCH SAILOR.
Merry-mad! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it! split jibs!
tear yourselves!

TASHTEGO.
(_Quietly smoking._)
Thats a white man; he calls that fun: humph! I save my sweat.

OLD MANX SAILOR.
I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are dancing
over. Ill dance over your grave, I willthats the bitterest threat of
your night-women, that beat head-winds round corners. O Christ! to
think of the green navies and the green-skulled crews! Well, well;
belike the whole worlds a ball, as you scholars have it; and so tis
right to make one ballroom of it. Dance on, lads, youre young; I was
once.

3D NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Spell oh!whew! this is worse than pulling after whales in a calmgive
us a whiff, Tash.

(_They cease dancing, and gather in clusters. Meantime the sky
darkensthe wind rises._)

LASCAR SAILOR.
By Brahma! boys, itll be douse sail soon. The sky-born, high-tide
Ganges turned to wind! Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!

MALTESE SAILOR.
(_Reclining and shaking his cap._)
Its the wavesthe snows caps turn to jig it now. Theyll shake their
tassels soon. Now would all the waves were women, then Id go drown,
and chassee with them evermore! Theres naught so sweet on earthheaven
may not match it!as those swift glances of warm, wild bosoms in the
dance, when the over-arboring arms hide such ripe, bursting grapes.

SICILIAN SAILOR.
(_Reclining._)
Tell me not of it! Hark ye, ladfleet interlacings of the limbslithe
swayingscoyingsflutterings! lip! heart! hip! all graze: unceasing
touch and go! not taste, observe ye, else come satiety. Eh, Pagan?
(_Nudging._)

TAHITAN SAILOR.
(_Reclining on a mat._)
Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!the Heeva-Heeva! Ah! low
veiled, high palmed Tahiti! I still rest me on thy mat, but the soft
soil has slid! I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat! green the first
day I brought ye thence; now worn and wilted quite. Ah me!not thou nor
I can bear the change! How then, if so be transplanted to yon sky? Hear
I the roaring streams from Pirohitees peak of spears, when they leap
down the crags and drown the villages?The blast! the blast! Up, spine,
and meet it! (_Leaps to his feet._)

PORTUGUESE SAILOR.
How the sea rolls swashing gainst the side! Stand by for reefing,
hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell theyll go
lunging presently.

DANISH SAILOR.
Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thou holdest! Well
done! The mate there holds ye to it stiffly. Hes no more afraid than
the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic with
storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!

4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR.
He has his orders, mind ye that. I heard old Ahab tell him he must
always kill a squall, something as they burst a waterspout with a
pistolfire your ship right into it!

ENGLISH SAILOR.
Blood! but that old mans a grand old cove! We are the lads to hunt him
up his whale!

ALL.
Aye! aye!

OLD MANX SAILOR.
How the three pines shake! Pines are the hardest sort of tree to live
when shifted to any other soil, and here theres none but the crews
cursed clay. Steady, helmsman! steady. This is the sort of weather when
brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea. Our captain
has his birth-mark; look yonder, boys, theres another in the
skylurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black.

DAGGOO.
What of that? Whos afraid of blacks afraid of me! Im quarried out of
it!

SPANISH SAILOR.
(_Aside._) He wants to bully, ah!the old grudge makes me touchy.
(_Advancing._) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable dark side of
mankinddevilish dark at that. No offence.

DAGGOO (_grimly_).
None.

ST. JAGOS SAILOR.
That Spaniards mad or drunk. But that cant be, or else in his one
case our old Moguls fire-waters are somewhat long in working.

5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Whats that I sawlightning? Yes.

SPANISH SAILOR.
No; Daggoo showing his teeth.

DAGGOO (_springing_).
Swallow thine, mannikin! White skin, white liver!

SPANISH SAILOR (_meeting him_).
Knife thee heartily! big frame, small spirit!

ALL.
A row! a row! a row!

TASHTEGO (_with a whiff_).
A row alow, and a row aloftGods and menboth brawlers! Humph!

BELFAST SAILOR.
A row! arrah a row! The Virgin be blessed, a row! Plunge in with ye!

ENGLISH SAILOR.
Fair play! Snatch the Spaniards knife! A ring, a ring!

OLD MANX SAILOR.
Ready formed. There! the ringed horizon. In that ring Cain struck Abel.
Sweet work, right work! No? Why then, God, madst thou the ring?

MATES VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK.
Hands by the halyards! in top-gallant sails! Stand by to reef topsails!

ALL.
The squall! the squall! jump, my jollies! (_They scatter._)

PIP (_shrinking under the windlass_).
Jollies? Lord help such jollies! Crish, crash! there goes the jib-stay!
Blang-whang! God! Duck lower, Pip, here comes the royal yard! Its
worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day of the year! Whod
go climbing after chestnuts now? But there they go, all cursing, and
here I dont. Fine prospects to em; theyre on the road to heaven.
Hold on hard! Jimmini, what a squall! But those chaps there are worse
yetthey are your white squalls, they. White squalls? white whale,
shirr! shirr! Here have I heard all their chat just now, and the white
whaleshirr! shirr!but spoken of once! and only this eveningit makes
me jingle all over like my tambourinethat anaconda of an old man swore
em in to hunt him! Oh, thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon
darkness, have mercy on this small black boy down here; preserve him
from all men that have no bowels to feel fear!




