CHAPTER CXIX. THE CANDLES


Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal
crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most
effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows
tornadoes that never swept tame northern lands. So, too, it is, that in
these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of
all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes burst from out that
cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and
bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly
ahead. When darkness came on, sky and sea roared and split with the
thunder, and blazed with the lightning, that showed the disabled masts
fluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury of the
tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at
every flash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional
disaster might have befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb
and Flask were directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer
lashing of the boats. But all their pains seemed naught. Though lifted
to the very top of the cranes, the windward quarter boat (Ahabs) did
not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up against the reeling
ships high tetering side, stove in the boats bottom at the stern, and
left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck, said Stubb, regarding the wreck,
but the sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, cant fight it. You
see, Mr. Starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before it leaps,
all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me,
all the start I have to meet it, is just across the deck here. But
never mind; its all in fun: so the old song says;(_sings_.)

Oh! jolly is the gale,
And a joker is the whale,
A flourishin his tail,
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean,
oh!

The scud all a flyin,
Thats his flip only foamin;
When he stirs in the spicin,
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean,
oh!

Thunder splits the ships,
But he only smacks his lips,
A tastin of this flip,
Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean,
oh!

Avast Stubb, cried Starbuck, let the Typhoon sing, and strike his
harp here in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold
thy peace.

But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward;
and I sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr.
Starbuck, theres no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my
throat. And when thats done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a
wind-up.

Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.

What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never
mind how foolish?

Here! cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his
hand towards the weather bow, markest thou not that the gale comes
from the eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the
very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where
is that stove? In the stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to standhis
stand-point is stove, man! Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou
must!

I dont half understand ye: whats in the wind?

Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to
Nantucket, soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubbs
question. The gale that now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it
into a fair wind that will drive us towards home. Yonder, to windward,
all is blackness of doom; but to leeward, homewardI see it lightens up
there; but not with the lightning.

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following
the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same
instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

Whos there?

Old Thunder! said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his
pivot-hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed
lances of fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off
the perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some
ships carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But
as this conductor must descend to considerable depth, that its end may
avoid all contact with the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly
towing there, it would be liable to many mishaps, besides interfering
not a little with some of the rigging, and more or less impeding the
vessels way in the water; because of all this, the lower parts of a
ships lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are generally made
in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up into the
chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

The rods! the rods! cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished
to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting
flambeaux, to light Ahab to his post. Are they overboard? drop them
over, fore and aft. Quick!

Avast! cried Ahab; lets have fair play here, though we be the
weaker side. Yet Ill contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and
Andes, that all the world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let
them be, sir.

Look aloft! cried Starbuck. The corpusants! the corpusants!

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each
tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of
the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like
three gigantic wax tapers before an altar.

Blast the boat! let it go! cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing
sea heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently
jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing. Blast it!but slipping
backward on the deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and
immediately shifting his tone, he criedThe corpusants have mercy on
us all!

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of
the calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses
from the topsail-yard-arms, when most they teter over to a seething
sea; but in all my voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when
Gods burning finger has been laid on the ship; when His Mene, Mene,
Tekel Upharsin has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all
their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away
constellation of stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the
gigantic jet negro, Daggoo, loomed up to thrice his real stature, and
seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come. The parted
mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth, which strangely
gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants; while lit up by
the preternatural light, Queequegs tattooing burned like Satanic blue
flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more
the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment
or two passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one.
It was Stubb. What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not
the same in the song.

No, no, it wasnt; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I
hope they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?have
they no bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuckbut its too dark
to look. Hear me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign
of good luck; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be
chock a block with sperm-oil, dye see; and so, all that sperm will
work up into the masts, like sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will
yet be as three spermaceti candlesthats the good promise we saw.

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubbs face slowly beginning
to glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: See! see! and once
more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled
supernaturalness in their pallor.

The corpusants have mercy on us all, cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame,
the parsee was kneeling in Ahabs front, but with his head bowed away
from him; while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where
they had just been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen,
arrested by the glare, now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a
knot of numbed wasps from a drooping, orchard twig. In various
enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or stepping, or running
skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the deck; but all
their eyes upcast.

Aye, aye, men! cried Ahab. Look up at it; mark it well; the white
flame but lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those main-mast
links there; I would fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against
it; blood against fire! So.

Then turningthe last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot
upon the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm,
he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian
once did worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that
to this hour I bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I
now know that thy right worship is defiance. To neither love nor
reverence wilt thou be kind; and een for hate thou canst but kill; and
all are killed. No fearless fool now fronts thee. I own thy speechless,
placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life will
dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me. In the midst of
the personified impersonal, a personality stands here. Though but a
point at best; whencesoeer I came; wheresoeer I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal
rights. But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of
love, and I will kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere
supernal power; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted
worlds, theres that in here that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou
clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest me, and like a true child of
fire, I breathe it back to thee.

[_Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap
lengthwise to thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes
his eyes, his right hand pressed hard upon them._]

I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung
from me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can
then grope. Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the
homage of these poor eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The
lightning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my
whole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on some stunning
ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to thee. Light though
thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness leaping out of
light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see, or not?
There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now do I glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know
not. Oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but
thine is greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself
unbegotten; certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself
unbegun. I know that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou
omnipotent. There is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear
spirit, to whom all thy eternity is but time, all thy creativeness
mechanical. Through thee, thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly
see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou too hast
thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief. Here again with
haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick the sky! I leap
with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee; defyingly
I worship thee!

The boat! the boat! cried Starbuck, look at thy boat, old man!

Ahabs harpoon, the one forged at Perths fire, remained firmly lashed
in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boats
bow; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather
sheath to drop off; and from the keen steel barb there now came a
levelled flame of pale, forked fire. As the silent harpoon burned there
like a serpents tongue, Starbuck grasped Ahab by the armGod, God is
against thee, old man; forbear! tis an ill voyage! ill begun, ill
continued; let me square the yards, while we may, old man, and make a
fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than this.

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
bracesthough not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast
mates thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But
dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the
burning harpoon, Ahab waved it like a torch among them; swearing to
transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a ropes end.
Petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking from the fiery dart
that he held, the men fell back in dismay, and Ahab again spoke:

All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and
heart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye
may know to what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out
the last fear! And with one blast of his breath he extinguished the
flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of
some lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it
so much the more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for
thunderbolts; so at those last words of Ahabs many of the mariners did
run from him in a terror of dismay.




CHAPTER CXX. THE DECK TOWARDS THE END OF THE FIRST NIGHT WATCH


_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working
loose, and the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?

Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, Id sway them up
now.

Sir?in Gods name!sir?

Well.

The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?

Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises,
but it has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.By
masts and keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some
coasting smack. Send down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest
trucks were made for wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now
sails amid the cloud-scud. Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards
send down their brain-trucks in tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft
there! I would een take it for sublime, did I not know that the colic
is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take medicine!




CHAPTER CXXI. MIDNIGHTTHE FORECASTLE BULWARKS


_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over
the anchors there hanging._

No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but
you will never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how
long ago is it since you said the very contrary? Didnt you once say
that whatever ship Ahab sails in, that ship should pay something extra
on its insurance policy, just as though it were loaded with powder
barrels aft and boxes of lucifers forward? Stop, now; didnt you say
so?

Well, suppose I did? What then? Ive part changed my flesh since that
time, why not my mind? Besides, supposing we are loaded with powder
barrels aft and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get
afire in this drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty
red hair, but you couldnt get afire now. Shake yourself; youre
Aquarius, or the water-bearer, Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat
collar. Dont you see, then, that for these extra risks the Marine
Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here are hydrants, Flask.
But hark, again, and Ill answer ye the other thing. First take your
leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can pass the
rope; now listen. Whats the mighty difference between holding a masts
lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasnt
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Dont you see, you
timber-head, that no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the
mast is first struck? What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in
a hundred carries rods, and Ahab,aye, man, and all of us,were in no
more danger then, in my poor opinion, than all the crews in ten
thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why, you King-Post, you, I suppose
you would have every man in the world go about with a small
lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officers skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why
dont ye be sensible, Flask? its easy to be sensible; why dont ye,
then? any man with half an eye can be sensible.

I dont know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.

Yes, when a fellows soaked through, its hard to be sensible, thats
a fact. And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the
turn there, and pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors
now as if they were never going to be used again. Tying these two
anchors here, Flask, seems like tying a mans hands behind him. And
what big generous hands they are, to be sure. These are your iron
fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder, Flask, whether the
world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an uncommon long
cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and weve done. So; next
to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say,
just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at
long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always
to be worn in all storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way,
serve to carry off the water, dye see. Same with cocked hats; the
cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask. No more monkey-jackets and
tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and drive down a
beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard; Lord,
Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly!
This is a nasty night, lad.




CHAPTER CXXII. MIDNIGHT ALOFTTHUNDER AND LIGHTNING


_The Main-top-sail yard.Tashtego passing new lashings around it._

Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. Whats
the use of thunder? Um, um, um. We dont want thunder; we want rum;
give us a glass of rum. Um, um, um!




