CHAPTER XCIX. THE DOUBLOON


Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck,
taking regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in
the multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been
added how that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood,
he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely
eyeing the particular object before him. When he halted before the
binnacle, with his glance fastened on the pointed needle in the
compass, that glance shot like a javelin with the pointed intensity of
his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again paused before the
mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the riveted
gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness, only
dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly
attracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as
though now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself in
some monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them. And some
certain significance lurks in all things, else all things are little
worth, and the round world itself but an empty cipher, except to sell
by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston, to fill up some morass
in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of
the heart of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands,
the head-waters of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst
all the rustiness of iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes,
yet, untouchable and immaculate to any foulness, it still preserved its
Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst a ruthless crew and every hour
passed by ruthless hands, and through the livelong nights shrouded with
thick darkness which might cover any pilfering approach, nevertheless
every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left it last. For it
was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and however
wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whales talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary
watch by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he
would ever live to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun
and tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; suns
disks and stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving,
are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems
almost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories, by
passing through those fancy mints, so Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy
example of these things. On its round border it bore the letters,
REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR: QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country
planted in the middle of the world, and beneath the great equator, and
named after it; and it had been cast midway up the Andes, in the
unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by those letters you saw the
likeness of three Andes summits; from one a flame; a tower on another;
on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a segment of
the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at
Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now
pausing.

Theres something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and
all other grand and lofty things; look here,three peaks as proud as
Lucifer. The firm tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the
courageous, the undaunted, and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all
are Ahab; and this round gold is but the image of the rounder globe,
which, like a magicians glass, to each and every man in turn but
mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains, small gains for
those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself. Methinks
now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out
of a former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born
in throes, tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So
be it, then! Heres stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.

No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devils claws must
have left their mouldings there since yesterday, murmured Starbuck to
himself, leaning against the bulwarks. The old man seems to read
Belshazzars awful writing. I have never marked the coin inspectingly.
He goes below; let me read. A dark valley between three mighty,
heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the Trinity, in some faint
earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us round; and over
all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon and a
hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil;
but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to
cheer. Yet, oh, the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we
would fain snatch some sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain!
This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will
quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely.

There nows the old Mogul, soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, hes
been twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with
faces which I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long.
And all from looking at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on
Negro Hill or in Corlaers Hook, Id not look at it very long ere
spending it. Humph! in my poor, insignificant opinion, I regard this as
queer. I have seen doubloons before now in my voyagings; your doubloons
of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your doubloons of Chili, your
doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with plenty of gold
moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter joes. What
then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so killing
wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! heres signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanack below calls ditto. Ill get the almanack
and as I have heard devils can be raised with Dabolls arithmetic, Ill
try my hand at raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with
the Massachusetts calendar. Heres the book. Lets see now. Signs and
wonders; and the sun, hes always among em. Hem, hem, hem; here they
arehere they goall alive:Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and
Jimimi! heres Gemini himself, or the Twins. Well; the sun he wheels
among em. Aye, here on the coin hes just crossing the threshold
between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring. Book! you lie there;
the fact is, you books must know your places. Youll do to give us the
bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts. Thats my
small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and Bowditchs
navigator, and Dabolls arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity if
there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders!
Theres a clue somewhere; wait a bit; histhark! By Jove, I have it!
Look you, Doubloon, your zodiac here is the life of man in one round
chapter; and now Ill read it off, straight out of the book. Come,
Almanack! To begin: theres Aries, or the Ramlecherous dog, he begets
us; then, Taurus, or the Bullhe bumps us the first thing; then Gemini,
or the Twinsthat is, Virtue and Vice; we try to reach Virtue, when lo!
comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here, going from Virtue,
Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the pathhe gives a few fierce bites and
surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin! thats
our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scaleshappiness weighed and found wanting; and while we
are very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the
Scorpion, stings us in rear; we are curing the wound, when whang come
the arrows all round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing himself.
As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside; heres the battering-ram,
Capricornus, or the Goat; full tilt, he comes rushing, and headlong we
are tossed; when Aquarius, or the Water-bearer, pours out his whole
deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with Pisces, or the Fishes, we
sleep. Theres a sermon now, writ in high heaven, and the sun goes
through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and hearty.
Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and so, alow
here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jollys the word for aye! Adieu, Doubloon!
But stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now,
and lets hear what hell have to say. There; hes before it; hell out
with something presently. So, so; hes beginning.

I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises
a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, whats all this
staring been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, thats true; and at
two cents the cigar, thats nine hundred and sixty cigars. I wont
smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like cigars, and heres nine
hundred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft to spy em out.

Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a
foolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of
wiseish look to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxmanthe old
hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before he took to the sea.
He luffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other
side of the mast; why, theres a horse-shoe nailed on that side; and
now hes back again; what does that mean? Hark! hes mutteringvoice
like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and listen!

If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when
the sun stands in some one of these signs. Ive studied signs, and know
their marks; they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch
in Copenhagen. Now, in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe
sign; for there it is, right opposite the gold. And whats the
horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe signthe roaring and
devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to think of thee.

Theres another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in
one kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequegall
tattooinglooks like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the
Cannibal? As I live hes comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone;
thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels, I
suppose, as the old women talk Surgeons Astronomy in the back country.
And by Jove, hes found something there in the vicinity of his thighI
guess its Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he dont know what to make
of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some kings
trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual.
What does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the
sign and bows himself; there is a sun on the coinfire worshipper,
depend upon it. Ho! more and more. This way comes Pippoor boy! would
he had died, or I; hes half horrible to me. He too has been watching
all of these interpretersmyself includedand look now, he comes to
read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand away again and hear him.
Hark!

I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.

Upon my soul, hes been studying Murrays Grammar! Improving his mind,
poor fellow! But whats that he says nowhist!

I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.

Why, hes getting it by hearthist! again.

I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.

Well, thats funny.

And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and Im a
crow, especially when I stand atop of this pine tree here. Caw! caw!
caw! caw! caw! caw! Aint I a crow? And wheres the scare-crow? There
he stands; two bones stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more
poked into the sleeves of an old jacket.

Wonder if he means me?complimentary!poor lad!I could go hang
myself. Any way, for the present, Ill quit Pips vicinity. I can stand
the rest, for they have plain wits; but hes too crazy-witty for my
sanity. So, so, I leave him muttering.

Heres the ships navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire
to unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and whats the consequence?
Then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aughts
nailed to the mast its a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old
Ahab! the White Whale; hell nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father,
in old Tolland county, cut down a pine tree once, and found a silver
ring grown over in it; some old darkeys wedding ring. How did it get
there? And so theyll say in the resurrection, when they come to fish
up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it, with bedded oysters
for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious gold!the
green miser ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey,
hey, Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!




CHAPTER C. LEG AND ARM. THE PEQUOD, OF NANTUCKET, MEETS THE SAMUEL
ENDERBY, OF LONDON


Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colors, bearing
down under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was standing in his
hoisted quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger
captain, who was carelessly reclining in his own boats bow. He was a
darkly-tanned, burly, good-natured, fine-looking man, of sixty or
thereabouts, dressed in a spacious roundabout, that hung round him in
festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty arm of this jacket streamed
behind him like the broidered arm of a huzzars surcoat.

Hast seen the White Whale?

See you this? and withdrawing it from the fold that had hidden it, he
held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden head
like a mallet.

Man my boat! cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
himStand by to lower!

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his
crew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the
stranger. But here a curious difficulty presented itself. In the
excitement of the moment, Ahab had forgotten that since the loss of his
leg he had never once stepped on board of any vessel at sea but his
own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very handy mechanical
contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be rigged and
shipped in any other vessel at a moments warning. Now, it is no very
easy matter for anybodyexcept those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemento clamber up a ships side from a boat on the open sea;
for the great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks,
and then instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So,
deprived of one leg, and the strange ship of course being altogether
unsupplied with the kindly invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly
reduced to a clumsy landsman again; hopelessly eyeing the uncertain
changeful height he could hardly hope to attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward
circumstance that befel him, and which indirectly sprang from his
luckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And
in the present instance, all this was heightened by the sight of the
two officers of the strange ship, leaning over the side, by the
perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and swinging towards him a
pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first they did not seem
to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a cripple to
use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a minute,
because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, I see, I see!avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing
over the cutting-tackle.

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive
curved blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end.
This was quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all,
slid his solitary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting
in the fluke of an anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then
giving the word, held himself fast, and at the same time also helped to
hoist his own weight, by pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running
parts of the tackle. Soon he was carefully swung inside the high
bulwarks, and gently landed upon the capstan head. With his ivory arm
frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other captain advanced, and Ahab,
putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory arm (like two
sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, Aye, aye, hearty! let
us shake bones together!an arm and a leg!an arm that never can
shrink, dye see; and a leg that never can run. Where didst thou see
the White Whale?how long ago?

The White Whale, said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards
the East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a
telescope; There I saw him, on the Line, last season.

And he took that arm off, did he? asked Ahab, now sliding down from
the capstan, and resting on the Englishmans shoulder, as he did so.

Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?

Spin me the yarn, said Ahab; how was it?

It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,
began the Englishman. I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time.
Well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat
fastened to one of them; a regular circus horse he was, too, that went
milling and milling round so, that my boats crew could only trim dish,
by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale. Presently up breaches
from the bottom of the sea a bouncing great whale, with a milky-white
head and hump, all crows feet and wrinkles.

It was he, it was he! cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended
breath.

And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.

Aye, ayethey were mine_my_ irons, cried Ahab, exultinglybut on!

Give me a chance, then, said the Englishman, good-humoredly. Well,
this old great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all
afoam into the pod, and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line.

Aye, I see!wanted to part it; free the fast-fishan old trickI know
him.

How it was exactly, continued the one-armed commander, I do not
know; but in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there
somehow; but we didnt know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled
on the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump! instead of the other
whales that went off to windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters
stood, and what a noble great whale it wasthe noblest and biggest I
ever saw, sir, in my lifeI resolved to capture him, spite of the
boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the hap-hazard line would
get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw (for I have a
devil of a boats crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all this, I
say, I jumped into my first mates boatMr. Mounttops here (by the
way, CaptainMounttop; Mounttopthe captain);as I was saying, I jumped
into Mounttops boat, which, dye see, was gunwale and gunwale with
mine, then; and snatching the first harpoon, let this old
great-grandfather have it. But, Lord, look you, sirhearts and souls
alive, manthe next instant, in a jiff, I was blind as a batboth eyes
outall befogged and bedeadened with black foamthe whales tail
looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air, like a marble
steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at midday,
with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboarddown comes the tail like a Lima
tower, cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and,
flukes first, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was
all chips. We all struck out. To escape his terrible flailings, I
seized hold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him, and for a moment clung
to that like a sucking fish. But a combing sea dashed me off, and at
the same instant, the fish, taking one good dart forwards, went down
like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron towing along near
me caught me here (clapping his hand just below his shoulder); yes,
caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hells flames, I was
thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the barb
ript its way along the fleshclear along the whole length of my
armcame out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;and that gentleman there
will tell you the rest (by the way, captainDr. Bunger, ships surgeon:
Bunger, my lad,the captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the
yarn.

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all
the time standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote
his gentlemanly rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but
sober one; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and
patched trowsers; and had thus far been dividing his attention between
a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in the other,
occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs of the two
crippled captains. But, at his superiors introduction of him to Ahab,
he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captains bidding.

It was a shocking bad wound, began the whale-surgeon; and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy

Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship, interrupted the one-armed
captain, addressing Ahab; go on, boy.

Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing
hot weather there on the Line. But it was no useI did all I could; sat
up with him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet

Oh, very severe! chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly
altering his voice, Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till
he couldnt see to put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half
seas over, about three oclock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up
with me indeed, and was very severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher,
and very dietetically severe, is Dr. Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh
out! why dont ye? You know youre a precious jolly rascal.) But, heave
ahead, boy, Id rather be killed by you than kept alive by any other
man.

My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sirsaid the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahabis apt to
be facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But
I may as well sayen passant, as the French remarkthat I myselfthat
is to say, Jack Bunger, late of the reverend clergyam a strict total
abstinence man; I never drink

Water! cried the captain; he never drinks it; its a sort of fits to
him; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go ongo on with
the arm story.

Yes, I may as well, said the surgeon, coolly. I was about observing,
sir, before Captain Boomers facetious interruption, that spite of my
best and severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse;
the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw;
more than two feet and several inches long. I measured it with the lead
line. In short, it grew black; I knew what was threatened, and off it
came. But I had no hand in shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is
against all rulepointing at it with the marlingspikethat is the
captains work, not mine; he ordered the carpenter to make it; he had
that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock some ones brains out
with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into diabolical
passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sirremoving his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull,
but which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever
having been a woundWell, the captain there will tell you how that
came here; he knows.

No, I dont, said the captain, but his mother did; he was born with
it. Oh, you solemn rogue, youyou Bunger! was there ever such another
Bunger in the watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in
pickle, you dog; you should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.

What became of the White Whale? now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this bye-play between the two Englishmen.

Oh! cried the one-armed captain, Oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we
didnt see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I
didnt then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick,
till some time afterwards, when coming back to the Line, we heard about
Moby Dickas some call himand then I knew it was he.

Didst thou cross his wake again?

Twice.

But could not fasten?

Didnt want to try to: aint one limb enough? What should I do without
this other arm? And Im thinking Moby Dick doesnt bite so much as he
swallows.

Well, then, interrupted Bunger, give him your left arm for bait to
get the right. Do you know, gentlemenvery gravely and mathematically
bowing to each Captain in successionDo you know, gentlemen, that the
digestive organs of the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine
Providence, that it is quite impossible for him to completely digest
even a mans arm? And he knows it too. So that what you take for the
White Whales malice is only his awkwardness. For he never means to
swallow a single limb; he only thinks to terrify by feints. But
sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly a patient of
mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once upon a
time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in
small tacks, dye see. No possible way for him to digest that
jack-knife, and fully incorporate it into his general bodily system.
Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are quick enough about it, and have a mind
to pawn one arm for the sake of the privilege of giving decent burial
to the other, why in that case the arm is yours; only let the whale
have another chance at you shortly, thats all.

No, thank ye, Bunger, said the English Captain, hes welcome to the
arm he has, since I cant help it, and didnt know him then; but not to
another one. No more White Whales for me; Ive lowered for him once,
and that has satisfied me. There would be great glory in killing him, I
know that; and there is a ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark
ye, hes best let alone; dont you think so, Captain?glancing at the
ivory leg.

He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let
alone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures. Hes all a
magnet! How long since thou sawst him last? Which way heading?

Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiends, cried Bunger, stoopingly
walking round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; this mans
bloodbring the thermometer;its at the boiling point!his pulse makes
these planks beat!sir!taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing
near to Ahabs arm.

Avast! roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarksMan the boat!
Which way heading?

Good God! cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put.
Whats the matter? He was heading east, I think.Is your Captain
crazy? whispering Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to
take the boats steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle
towards him, commanded the ships sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boats stern, and the Manilla men
were springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him.
With back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own,
Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod.




