CHAPTER CXXVII. THE DECK


_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the
open hatchway; the Carpenter calking its seams; the string of twisted
oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of
his frock.Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip
following him._

Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand
complies with my humor more genially than that boy.Middle aisle of a
church! Whats here?

Life buoy, sir. Mr. Starbucks orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the
hatchway!

Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.

Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.

Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy
shop?

I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?

Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?

Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but
theyve set me now to turning it into something else.

Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, inter-meddling,
monopolizing, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the
next day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those
same coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a
jack-of-all-trades.

But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.

The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a
coffin? The Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the
craters for volcanoes; and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in
hand. Dost thou never?

Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, Im indifferent enough, sir, for that; but
the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there
was none in his spade, sir. But the calking mallet is full of it. Hark
to it.

Aye, and thats because the lid theres a sounding-board; and what in
all things makes the sounding-board is thistheres naught beneath. And
yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter.
Hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against
the churchyard gate, going in?

Faith, sir, Ive

Faith? Whats that?

Why, faith, sir, its only a sort of exclamation-likethats all,
sir.

Um, um; go on.

I was about to say, sir, that

Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?
Look at thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.

He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot
latitudes. Ive heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the
Gallipagos, is cut by the Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some
sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his middle. Hes always
under the Linefiery hot, I tell ye! Hes looking this waycome, oakum;
quick. Here we go again. This wooden mallet is the cork, and Im the
professor of musical glassestap, tap!

(_Ahab to himself._)

Theres a sight! Theres sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping the
hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that thing
rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag, that
fellow. Rat-tat! So mans seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all
materials! What things real are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here
nows the very dreaded symbol of grim death, by a mere hap, made the
expressive sign of the help and hope of most endangered life. A
life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be that in some
spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-preserver!
Ill think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of earth,
that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed
sound? I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again.
Now, then, Pip, well talk this over; I do suck most wondrous
philosophies from thee! Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds
must empty into thee!




CHAPTER CXXVIII. THE PEQUOD MEETS THE RACHEL


Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down
upon the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time
the Pequod was making good speed through the water; but as the
broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all
fell together as blank bladders that are burst, and all life fled from
the smitten hull.

Bad news; she brings bad news, muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he
could hopefully hail, Ahabs voice was heard.

Hast seen the White Whale?

Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question;
and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger
captain himself, having stopped his vessels way, was seen descending
her side. A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the
Pequods main-chains, and he sprang to the deck. Immediately he was
recognized by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew. But no formal salutation
was exchanged.

Where was he?not killed!not killed! cried Ahab, closely advancing.
How was it?

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous,
while three of the strangers boats were engaged with a shoal of
whales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship; and
while they were yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump and head
of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the blue water, not very far
to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boata reserved onehad been
instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the wind, this
fourth boatthe swiftest keeled of allseemed to have succeeded in
fasteningat least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell
anything about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat;
and then a swift gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing
more; whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must have
indefinitely run away with his pursuers, as often happens. There was
some apprehension, but no positive alarm, as yet. The recall signals
were placed in the rigging; darkness came on; and forced to pick up her
three far to windward boatsere going in quest of the fourth one in the
precisely opposite directionthe ship had not only been necessitated to
leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for the time, to
increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at last
safe aboard, she crowded all sailstunsail on stunsailafter the
missing boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every
other man aloft on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a
sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when
last seen; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all
around her; and not finding anything, had again dashed on; again
paused, and lowered her boats; and though she had thus continued doing
till day light; yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been
seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his
object in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his
own in the search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles
apart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

I will wager something now, whispered Stubb to Flask, that some one
in that missing boat wore off that Captains best coat; mayhap, his
watchhes so cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two
pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height
of the whaling season? See, Flask, only see how pale he lookspale in
the very buttons of his eyeslookit wasnt the coatit must have been
the

My boy, my own boy is among them. For Gods sakeI beg, I
conjurehere exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had
but icily received his petition. For eight-and-forty hours let me
charter your shipI will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for itif
there be no other wayfor eight-and-forty hours onlyonly thatyou
must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this thing.

His son! cried Stubb, oh, its his son hes lost! I take back the
coat and watchwhat says Ahab? We must save that boy.

Hes drowned with the rest on em, last night, said the old Manx
sailor standing behind them; I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachels
the more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the
Captains sons among the number of the missing boats crew; but among
the number of the other boats crews, at the same time, but on the
other hand, separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the
chase, there had been still another son; as that for a time, the
wretched father was plunged to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity;
which was only solved for him by his chief mates instinctively
adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such emergencies,
that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats, always to
pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not
till forced to it by Ahabs iciness did he allude to his one yet
missing boy; a little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the
earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketers paternal love, had
thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a
vocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race. Nor does it
unfrequently occur, that Nantucket captains will send a son of such
tender age away from them, for a protracted three or four years voyage
in some other ship than their own; so that their first knowledge of a
whalemans career shall be unenervated by any chance display of a
fathers natural but untimely partiality, or undue apprehensiveness and
concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab;
and Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without
the least quivering of his own.

I will not go, said the stranger, till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me
as you would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a
boy, Captain Ahabthough but a child, and nestling safely at home nowa
child of your old age tooYes, yes, you relent; I see itrun, run, men,
now, and stand by to square in the yards.

Avast, cried Ahabtouch not a rope-yarn; then in a voice that
prolongingly moulded every wordCaptain Gardiner, I will not do it.
Even now I lose time. Good bye, good bye. God bless ye, man, and may I
forgive myself, but I must go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle
watch, and in three minutes from this present instant warn off all
strangers: then brace forward again, and let the ship sail as before.

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin,
leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter
rejection of his so earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment,
Gardiner silently hurried to the side; more fell than stepped into his
boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel
was in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot,
however small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung
round; starboard and larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat
against a head sea; and again it pushed her before it; while all the
while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men, as three
tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woful way, you plainly saw
that this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without comfort.
She was Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were not.




